---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C001
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: The Conductor

This is the day we get down to work. Yesterday, the
guideline panel sat through lectures on guideline methodology, debated the quality rating criteria for the individual studies, and approved the recommendation grading
system.
My job doesn’t have an official title. As a general internist, I am almost never a clinical expert on the panels I
facilitate. I am chosen for my guideline methods experience. Part guide, part policeman, I support the panel members through the process, acting as a resource for the finer
procedural points and bringing them back to the evidence
when they stray.
This panel is like many others. The quipster across
from me has probably been making jokes since kindergarten. The quiet one at the end—I take note of her. She may
have some important points, but the group will need to be
stilled to hear them. I try to measure up the chair. Can he
participate but limit his own desire to join in? Will he draw
out his colleagues’ expertise? Will he help me when it’s
time to move on? I have learned over the years that panel
members often have wells of knowledge and talent that
they sometimes don’t share. It’s my job to engage them.
We get started. We tackle the easy question first.
There is a large body of good-quality evidence, which I
present to the group. Slowly, hesitantly, the panel members
wade through the evidence tables. I allow the debate to
move freely—this is necessary. When some people start
looking bored, I move the panel to a close. It’s time to
write the recommendation. This panel is particularly good;
everyone participates.
The recommendation sounds terrible at first—too
long, too many words, unclear. Who knew it was so hard
to write a simple sentence? The panel is discouraged. I
volunteer to put up a sentence. They are happy to tackle it,
because I am neither friend nor colleague. They play with
the words. Should or must? Smokers, people who smoke,
or tobacco users? Patients or clients? Willing to quit, attempting to quit, or making a quit attempt? Readers of
guidelines often dismiss the recommendations as poorly
written, not recognizing the effort the panel members give
to crafting the best sentence possible. I know how hard
panel members try.
When they hesitate, bogged down by the rules, I challenge them and remind them of their job: They are here to
provide guidance. What does the panel really want to say?
I play the part of the nonexpert clinician. What do I want
to hear? I urge them to write something as specific and
unambiguous as the evidence will allow. We finish the
sentence and vote on it. This panel decided that 80% approval was required to move to the next part; we have
unanimous support. We then vote on the level of evidence.
Everyone agrees—“high-quality.” The strength of the recommendation? “Strong,” the panel members decide. The
first recommendation is complete. Everyone is pleased and
relieved. It has taken half the day.
Midway through lunch, we begin again. In the afternoon, panel members, more comfortable with the process,
take over from me and present the evidence to their colleagues. They become even more engaged. They have the
hang of it now, and the process moves quickly. Soon after,
we lose track of time, and the recommendations flow of
their own accord. I love this part. We finish the afternoon
with 5 recommendations to our credit. The guideline is
but half complete. Many teleconferences will follow, but
the bonds have been forged, the training has been assimilated, and the group departs content with a job well-done.
I make my way home, exhausted.
The first time my father took me to see an orchestra, I
asked him who the man at the front was.
“The conductor,” he said.
“But he’s not playing an instrument. Why is he there?
He just seems to be waving his hands all the time,” I said.
“Don’t be fooled. The conductor plays a very important part. He brings the orchestra together. See, his movements have a purpose. Right now he is guiding the
violins.”
Not playing an instrument myself, but wanting to be
part of the music, I considered my father’s words. I could
do that one day, I thought
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C002
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: Hard Labor

The sirens blared, and the flashing lights painted the
road red as ambulance 43 weaved its boxy way to the
Denver county jail.
My partner and I threw open the back doors and
wheeled out the bright white bed that glowed in the dark
silence that always seems to surround prisons, like lips
tightly sealed around a secret.
As we prepared to walk into the front of the jail, I
caught a glimpse of the full moon filling the circumference
of one of the wheels of razor wire. It felt like we were being
watched by a giant spotlight surveying the grounds.
We pushed through the entrance and gave the guard a
nod. They were ready for us. The metal detector cried out
when my stethoscope violated its invisible border, as if it
knew we were here to take away one of its coveted
possessions.
As we navigated the long, narrow hallways, the rusty
wheels of the bed put up only a half-hearted fight, like an
aged boxer going through the motions of just one more
round. It knew these halls well. Blank stares came from the
tiny cells around us; our green scrubs fantastically contrasting with their blue ones, as if we were in some deep-sea
exhibit.
Our entourage of police and paramedics found the girl
in the infirmary, which looked like it was straight out of a
Hitchcock film—archaic medical devices lined up against
the walls, contorting our faces in their cold, metallic
reflections.
Handcuffs swallowed the prisoner’s wrists and ankles
as the guards fixed her into a position that resembled a
spider sticking to its web. She was quiet and still.
The Eastern European guard— bound by the rigid
rules of his paperwork—was reluctant to turn the patient
over to us without first filling in his line marked for complications: “None” was an unacceptable option to him.
Apparently, a 7-pound object ready to burst out of the
prisoner was not enough.
My stethoscope scanned her body, searching for any
signs of abnormality. I briefly thought of the irony of the
term “HELLP syndrome” before I told the guard that the
prisoner seemed stable. He suspiciously smiled his jaundiced teeth at her and let us go, but not before reminding
us that “those cuffs are going to have to stay on for the
entire delivery.”
The police officer with us mumbled something under
his breath, and we whisked the patient back down the same
narrow hallway, past the same blank stares.
“Social Work will meet us at L&D to take the baby
into custody after the delivery,” the paramedic instructed.
“Oh, and please don’t push yet.”
After we loaded the prisoner into the back of the ambulance, along with the pair of armed police officers, the
prisoner and I made eye contact for the first time. What I
saw surprised me. Her eyes were filled with sorrow and
loneliness—a look completely unlike what I had become
used to seeing on the labor and delivery deck. I knew
nothing about this woman’s past, but it didn’t matter. She
was a soon-to-be mother, plagued by the knowledge that
her firstborn child would be taken from her. It seemed like
a plot line out of a Greek tragedy, and I had become a part
of it. Not once in those 20 minutes inside the jail did it
occur to me to introduce myself.
It was at that moment that something else began to
bother me. I debated whether what I was about to ask
would be laughed off, or if it would be viewed as another
naive question from a medical student along for his first
ambulance ride. I didn’t want them to think it was a joke,
because it wasn’t. I decided to risk it and turned back
toward the paramedic.
“How do you deliver a baby when your legs are handcuffed to the bed?”
The paramedic paused for a second, shrugged her
shoulders and said, “I always try and leave before that
part.”
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C003
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: The Watchman

“I have a very big favor to ask you.”
Most members of my synagogue had heard, at one time
or another, the unmistakable voice of Rachel Rosen at the
other end of the phone. For almost any organized
activity—a Sunday school picnic, a charity drive, a reception for a new family, an evening lecture by a visiting
scholar—“Rachel the Arranger” could be found working
behind the scenes, making sure the event went off
perfectly.
I immediately began to compose my regrets. This was
not a good time for big favors. My children were out of
school for the summer, my wife was increasingly busy with
her new practice, and I had a big grant due at the end of
the month.
“I don’t know if you’ve heard the bad news,” she
warned, and then proceeded to tell me that one of our
congregants, who was also one of my colleagues at the
Medical Center, had tragically died of a heart attack while
jogging earlier that day. “I’m lining up Shomerim for tonight; I hope you can help.”
Jewish tradition dictates that the body of the deceased is
never left alone from the moment of death until it is laid to
rest in the earth. Pious members of the congregation wash the
body; dress it in a simple white shroud; and place it in a closed
wooden casket. Then Shomerim—watchmen—stand a constant vigil through the night, praying and reading psalms to
comfort and honor its soul. But these customs are not usually
practiced in the Reform Jewish tradition in which I was
brought up. Yet, I had unknowingly stood as a Shomer once
before.
It was Christmas Eve of my intern year, and I had
volunteered to take call. Preholiday discharges had emptied
the hospital of all but the critically ill, the sickest of whom
was Mildred Rubenstein, an elderly woman who had suffered a massive heart attack and was dying. “Has anyone
notified the family?” I inquired. They had: Her only son
was flying in from California, but an ice storm had delayed
all of the flights into Chicago. I scribbled some notes in her
chart and then retired to the call room. My goal was not to
leave it for anything except the most urgent emergencies
until 6:00 a.m., when my shift ended. I was soon deep
asleep.
Sometime soon thereafter, the phone rang. Mrs.
Rubenstein had died, and the charge nurse wanted me to
come up to pronounce her death.
“Can’t this wait until morning?” I pleaded.
“No, it can’t.”
Disgruntled, I trudged back to the CCU. I verified
absent vital signs, filled out the requisite paperwork, and
watched the nurses perform their final rituals and wheel
the body away. I then hastened back to the sanctuary of the
call room and sleep.

The phone rang again around 4:00 a.m. Mrs. Rubenstein’s son had arrived. The nurses had informed him of his
mother’s passing, but he was asking to see me.
“What does he want?”
“He wants to see the doctor.”
Once again I returned to the CCU. Mrs. Rubenstein’s
son was seated at the conference room table. He was still
wearing his trench coat, his hair was soaked from the
storm, and a deep sadness lay in his eyes.
“I’m so sorry about your mother,” I said.
“Can I see her?”
“They’ve already taken her downstairs.”
“Please, Doctor. I want to see her one last time.”
One last time . . . by Jewish tradition, her casket
would be closed. This was his last chance to visit with his
mother.
I called a security officer, who met us in the basement
and unlocked the morgue. Inside, I was dismayed to find
10 enshrouded cadavers on gurneys crammed into the
walk-in refrigerator. I circled around them, searching for
any identifying feature, but not even a toe tag was visible.
Tentatively, I unwrapped the most promising candidate; it
was not Mrs. Rubenstein. I found her on the fourth try.
I wiped the secretions from around her mouth and
straightened out her hair as best I could, then wheeled the
gurney into an empty freight elevator, the only place that
offered any privacy. “You can come in now,” I announced,
and retreated a respectful distance. I heard her son speaking softly to her and then heard sobbing. After some time
he emerged.
“Thank you so much, Doctor,” he said, taking my
hand. But he made no move to leave.
“We should go back now,” I said.
“Please, Doctor. Could I ask you for one more favor?
Would you stay with my mother until the funeral director
arrives?”
I hesitated. What a strange request, I thought to myself. I’m cold and I’m tired and I just want to go back to
sleep. But still, something finally moved me to assent.
“Go get some rest,” I told him at last. “I’ll stay here
with your mother.”
The security guard escorted him away, I pulled up a
chair, and once again I was alone with Mrs. Rubenstein.
Exhausted, I fell into a fitful dream: I began to hear chanting in Hebrew, I could make out people standing around a
grave—I was at my sister’s funeral. Most of the faces were
blurred, but one stood out with startling clarity. It was Dr.
Anya Petrovsky, the pediatric oncologist who had cared for
my sister throughout her illness. A large, imposing Russian
woman, she was known among the housestaff as “The
Commissar.” My sister—one of the few who could evoke
her gentleness—had called her Dr. Anna. Silent tears were streaming down her face. She was attending her patient for
the last time.
I jolted awake, disoriented and strangely disturbed.
After a few moments, I did the most peculiar thing: I
started talking to Mrs. Rubenstein about my sister.
“She was only fourteen years old. You know, she had
been doing really well, but then she started getting so weak.
They put her in Children’s Hospital and I visited her every
night. I’d bring her ice cream and hold her hand, and we’d
talk about my college life. One night there was a big dance
on campus, but I didn’t want to leave her. ‘Go have some
fun,’ she said. ‘You can tell me all about in the morning.’
So I went and stayed out all night. But when I went back
to the hospital early the next morning, her room was
empty. ‘Where’s my sister?” I asked a nurse. ‘Oh, I’m so
sorry. She died last night. We couldn’t reach you. They’ve
taken her to the funeral home.’”
“I wasn’t there when she died,” I wept. “I never saw
her again...I never said goodbye. She didn’t look like she
was dying. She didn’t seem like she was afraid. In fact, that
night she looked so... radiant.” And as I poured out my
heart to Mrs. Rubenstein, I hoped that someone had stood
watch over my sister, too.
The funeral director arrived at 6:00 a.m. I climbed
back up the stairs into the light of the wards, checked out
my patients, and stepped out into the cold morning air.
The ice storm had passed, and the sky was a brilliant electric blue of such intensity that it seemed to touch the earth.
The trees were glazed with a thick crystal coating that refracted the morning sun into dazzling flashes of color. I felt
a profound sense of peace that I would not fully understand until much later.
Rachel’s voice returned my thoughts to the present.
“I’m sorry to ask on such short notice, but I really need
someone for the late night shift.”
And as I held the phone, I recalled the final request of
Mrs. Rubenstein’s son, I saw the crisp white sheets on the
empty bed in my sister’s hospital room, and I felt a shard
of the pain that I knew my late colleague’s family was now
suffering.
In his Daily Prayer of a Physician, Maimonides gives
thanks to God that “Thou hast chosen me in thy mercy to
watch over the life and death of thy creatures”—but
watching over death is the hardest thing a physician must
do, for it seems to be the antithesis of all that we are. Yet,
as I have confronted death in the many years that have
passed since that icy night, I have seen how the seemingly
smallest gestures often provide the most immense comfort.
Paradoxically, it is perhaps in those moments that we have
the greatest power to heal.
“When do you need someone?” I asked Rachel.
“From 4 o’clock until 6 in the morning.”
This time, I did not hesitate.
“I’ll be there.”
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C004
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: A Doctor’s Response to Torture

Stepping off the plane in an unfamiliar country, jetlagged, and unable to speak a word of the native language, I was a little disoriented. I met my patient—whom
I will call Rashid—at the hotel in less than an hour of my
arrival. He was apprehensive. We spent the evening in a
relaxed, informal atmosphere with a group of attorneys.
Despite the fact that I was a white, non-Muslim, American
woman, we were able to make a connection. Rashid took
us to a beautiful beach, peppered with traditional wooden
fishing boats, and he gave local children a few coins to
pick some baobab fruit for us to sample from a very
unusual looking tree. The attorneys, Rashid, and I listened to his music and teased him about his taste in
Western hip-hop.
As a physician evaluator for Physicians for Human
Rights, I had been asked to interview Rashid. There was no
clinical space in which to perform this evaluation, so we
used my hotel room. I quickly learned the extent of
Rashid’s profound suffering. He described himself as a
ghost wandering around the town in isolation, unable to
eat or sleep. He repeatedly asked me if he was “crazy,”
because that is how he perceived himself. He detailed the
horrors of his arrest, during which he was beaten so badly
that he was admitted to a hospital with multiple fractures
and internal injuries. He described how he was kidnapped
from his hospital bed and survived a 5-year ordeal in U.S.
custody in multiple detention sites, including Afghanistan.
In the stifling, humid hotel room, he detailed the methods
of his torture: severe beatings, prolonged painful stress positions, prolonged solitary confinement, forced nakedness
and humiliation, sleep deprivation, withholding of food,
sexual assault (anal rape and sodomy), forced intravenous
medication during interrogations that he thought might be
a “truth serum,” and painful shackling. At times, he was
denied medical and psychiatric care.
As the hours wore on, Rashid’s story became almost
unbearable. There were times when we both broke down
in tears. Rashid described being forced to lie on a wet mat,
naked and handcuffed, having cold water poured on him
while being kicked and beaten, and then rolled up in the
wet mat “like a corpse”—cold, wet, and shivering. In the
“water room,” men attempted to insert the spout of a water
jug into his anus. He reported that his arms were chained
to an overhead pipe while he was in a standing position for
what he estimates was 4 days. His heels could not touch
the floor and he developed severe back and shoulder pain.
He was not allowed to use the toilet, and loud music blared
the entire time. (“It is just death.”) He went on to describe
being locked naked in a “coffin”; he could not move and it
was difficult to breathe. At one point during his detention,
his flesh started rotting under a cast that was left unattended for too long. His request for medical care was ignored until he protested by going on a hunger strike for 6
days.
Rashid’s prominent symptoms included extreme sleep
disturbance, sadness, loss of appetite with substantial
weight loss, and difficulty interacting with other people,
(including family and friends), resulting in profound isolation. He has not been able to work as a result of his debilitating psychological symptoms and has no means to support himself. The lack of self-sufficiency has caused further
depression, feelings of inadequacy, and shame and humiliation when he has to rely on his family for basic needs.
Rashid told me he wakes up at 2 a.m. and takes walks.
(“My head feels empty, like an empty box.”) His life has
unraveled since his return from U.S. custody, and he is
unable to return to his former level of functioning and
reintegrate back into his family and community. He meets
diagnostic criteria for posttraumatic stress disorder and major depression, but those Western-based diagnoses do not
adequately characterize his palpable suffering.
In the evening, Rashid borrowed a car and we decompressed on a drive to the beautiful bush and beaches. I had
to abandon the Western doctor–patient boundaries. I
learned about local life and customs and tasted the local
food. I photographed the old colonial buildings and monkeys and camels. I then met his mother and sister, at his
request. We sat on the floor of a simple but welcoming
cement structure, were served sweets and coffee, and were
treated as warmly as if we were family or close friends. I
explained to Rashid’s family that he wasn’t “crazy” and
that there was hope for recovery. Neither Rashid nor his
family knew of posttraumatic stress disorder, or understood the link between the torture and his symptoms.
Their gratitude for my simple explanation was humbling.
We conducted our final interviews on the beach at Rashid’s
request. After his 5 years in confinement, this vast expanse
of beauty was a place of solace and comfort for him. He
would stop every so often and illustrate a point by drawing
in the sand, such as when he drew a rough reproduction of
a cage in which he had been confined. It was difficult to
leave Rashid after having uncovered such desperate need
and having no available resources to alleviate his suffering.
My fears were intensified by the fact that Rashid’s suffering
was not the aftermath of a natural disaster, but one deliberately inflicted by other humans. After departure, I received a text message from Rashid. “Thank u my Dr. U
help me very much and my brain it gonna be OK.”
This unique and complicated situation demanded creative and unorthodox measures. The combined collaboration of Physicians for Human Rights and a local organization made initial treatment for this man a reality. After I
left, the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture agreed to fund treatment and rehabilitation services, and a psychologist traveled from a neighboring country try to provide mental health treatment. An antidepressant
was sent by post, and I initially gave instructions and monitored Rashid’s progress by cell phone. I continue to have
regular phone contact with him to provide support and to
monitor symptoms while trying to organize more regular
treatment. I have seen improvement in his self-esteem because
he is better able to understand the root cause of his symptoms.
I have detected something new in our communication—
hope. Rashid is now hopeful about his recovery and future.
And I am hopeful that it is possible to repair the wounds
my country has inflicted.
Rashid was given a document upon his release that confirmed his confinement as well as his innocence. On the basis
of my evaluation, I have a high degree of medical certainty
that he was tortured while in U.S. custody. Nonetheless, neither he nor I know the identity of the perpetrators.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C005
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: A Certain Gift, and a Question of Ethics

I studied undergraduate medicine at a university in
Orissa, one of the eastern states of India. In this primarily rural, paddy-crop state, half of the population lives below the poverty line, with a yearly per capita income equal
to about $100. This is one of the most impoverished states
in India. Therefore, as an intern, I rotated in an extremely
poorly funded state hospital. Unlike other state facilities in
the country, the only thing that we could provide free to
our patients was medical consultation. We had neither adequate supplies of medication in our pharmacy nor enough
equipment in our inventory. Admitted patients had to purchase medications required for their treatment from expensive, privately owned stores outside the hospital. Sometimes we had to ask patients to buy such essentials as
swabs, dressings, intravenous catheters, and disposable syringes as well. Not surprisingly, our hospital was a refuge
for only the critically ill among the critically poor. People
with better means preferred private nursing homes, and
understandably so.
On one of those unforgiving, blazing subtropical afternoons during my internship, I was on call on the general
medicine floors. A lanky, dark, middle-aged fellow with a
sunburned, unshaven face trudged across the hallway. His
threadbare vest was so drenched in sweat that it seemed as
if it would start dripping any moment. He was carrying a
frail-looking boy in his arms—for the lack of a stretcher, I
presumed. The boy looked very young, although I guessed
he must have been at least in his late teens or he would
have been admitted to pediatric floors. He was drowsy and
breathing fast and shallow, moaning occasionally. I was
told that this young boy was my new patient. The nurses
laid the boy on one of the beds, and I measured his vitals.
He was hypotensive, with systolic blood pressure palpable
at around 80 mm Hg and a heart rate in the 120s. Normal
saline boluses started in the emergency room were still going. His skin must have been as hot as the cement veranda
outside; the thermometer read 104 °F. I reviewed his chart
notes. The senior physicians suspected septic shock due to
pneumonia. An accompanying chest film showed some lobar consolidation.
“Your son?” a nurse questioned. I couldn’t tell if the
man nodded or sighed.
It was a particularly busy time at the hospital. We had
many cases of cerebral malaria, our intensive care beds were
full, and telemetry monitors were unthinkable outside of
the intensive care unit. One of the nurses asked the boy’s
father why he had not taken him to a nursing home.
“What do you think, sister?” replied the father, wiping
his forehead. “I carried my boy on my back and walked 3
miles to reach the hospital because I didn’t have 5 rupees
for the bus.”
I did not know back then that 5 rupees amounted to
10 cents. I looked at the father. The wrinkles around his
eyes looked like little crevasses. His face bore an expression
I could not understand. There were shades of sorrow, but
more than that, an air of resignation that frightened me.
I would be lying if I said that this was the poorest
patient we had ever admitted, or that we tried to help each
of our patients without means. However, on that day it
happened. It was clear to us that the boy’s father could not
purchase medications, so we asked the attending physician
to arrange for some supplies. He was able to borrow antibiotics and a vial of phenylephrine from the surgical floor.
The remaining staff and I collected some money for syringes, intravenous catheters, and other basic provisions,
and we began treatment. Throughout the night, we administered boluses of normal saline and hoped that he would
not require high doses of phenylephrine, because the small
vial was all we had. All night, his blood pressure hovered
precariously between low and low-normal, his heart rate
and temperature stayed high, and the pulse oximeter reading remained borderline. The father put cold compresses
on his son’s body. The boy remained semiconscious, fidgeting with his oxygen mask and complaining to his father.
At dawn, for the first time in 16 hours, the boy opened his
eyes and looked at his father. His temperature plummeted,
and his blood pressure rose to 3 digits. The night nurse
squeezed my hand in sheer joy, and the father wept.
Over the next 2 days, the boy improved considerably.
His father stayed with him; slept on the floor by his bed;
and prayed, squatting, next to the door. He set up a small
kitchen in the corridor close to his son’s station and regularly cooked fresh lentil soup and rice for him. On the sixth
day, when we were ready to discharge the boy, the father
came up to me holding a small gunnysack. He sat on the
floor, put the sack at my feet, joined his palms together,
and shyly explained that he had brought some rice. I
looked at him questioningly. He added almost apologetically that a little rice was all he had to show his gratitude.
With whatever local language I could muster, I told him
that it was not necessary. I explained that the government
paid me to do my job. But he would not budge. He said it
was a gift. I told him that doctors could not accept gifts
from patients, yet he would not leave until I accepted the
little burlap bag.
I often remember this incident, especially whenever
there are discussions about physicians accepting gifts from
their patients. I know that position papers on medical ethics say that small gifts from patients are not ethically problematic. However, 6 pounds of rice from an indigent
farmer hailing from an Indian state of famine and drought
was not a small gift. That bag of rice has been the only gift
I have ever accepted from a patient. It has also been one of
the most expensive things I have ever had the pleasure of
holding in my hands. I donated it to the hospital kitchen
later, and have never questioned the ethics of the matter.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C006
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: The Emperor’s New Clothes

I
n his famous story, “The Emperor’s New Clothes,” Danish author Hans Christian Andersen tells of an emperor,
vain and pompous, who is scammed by rogues who tell
him that that they can weave him royal regalia made of a
cloth so exquisite and fine that no one can see it but the
most competent and intelligent of persons.
When the scoundrels mime draping him in this miraculous fabric, he stands naked, but no one—including
the emperor himself—dare say so, for fear that they will be
thought to be stupid and inept. It isn’t until the Emperor
parades proudly through the streets unclothed that a child
cries out (the only person to do so in a large crowd of
cheering subjects) that the emperor is naked.
Recently, as an attending physician on an internal
medicine housestaff inpatient teaching service, I saw a
middle-aged woman who had been transferred to us from
the orthopedics floor after yet another in a series of episodes of septic arthritis. She smiled at me when, between
short periodic bouts of weeping and writhing, she told me
that she had had “over 40 operations” on the currently
affected knee alone, as well as at least 20 surgeries on other
joints and various other parts of her body. She had total
body pain, she said, and had spent much of the last 20 to
30 years of her life being recurrently hospitalized and operated on.
“Why do you think you have had so much trouble?” I
asked her.
“I have Ehlers–Danlos,” she answered. “I guess I’m
just susceptible. That’s what the doctors told me.”
She had no family history of hypermobility syndromes
nor, on my examination, did she have any evident physical
findings of Ehlers–Danlos syndrome variants (which are all
due to genetically variable defective connective tissue) and
generally a clinical diagnosis. It was impossible for me to
test even the few remaining unoperated joints of her hands
and feet for hypermobility, as she cried out in pain at the
merest touch. Her skin was not velvety, nor was it abnormally stretchable. There was no bruising of her skin, and
her multiple surgical scars seemed to have healed normally;
they were not wide or nodular. Her hard palate was not
high arched, and her feet were not flat.
Did she indeed have Ehlers–Danlos syndrome? Indeed, every note previously written in the electronic medical record (EMR) throughout her multiple admissions recorded it as her history and included it in her long list of
final diagnoses, but not a single one of these notes detailed
any aspects of physical examination that suggested that
those who wrote them (attendings, residents, fellows, medical students, or nurses) had actually looked for it. Many of
these physical examination notes, both initial and daily
follow-up, which were written during any one of her many
hospitalizations, were identical, almost word for word (except for the specific joint in peril at the time), although
they were supposedly written by different people on different days.
It seems that no one at any level of expertise, at least as
was recorded in our EMR, had ever seriously questioned
the diagnosis of Ehlers–Danlos syndrome. There was one
distant note by a medical resident who saw her on an
emergency department visit that added something new in
social history, which was that the patient had begun training to be a nurse but never graduated. Was he thinking, as
I was, of Munchausen syndrome? If so, why did he not
specify the positive and negative physical findings for
Ehlers–Danlos syndrome, the underlying disease that she
claimed was the root source of her problems?
My third-year medical student assigned to this patient
gave me her written admission workup to critique, which I
did. There it was again—“Ehlers–Danlos”—both in the
history and in the diagnosis list, but not in physical
examination.
“Tell me about the Ehlers–Danlos syndromes,” I asked
her. She had done her reading and rattled off a highly
competent summary of what she had learned.
“What makes you think this patient has an Ehlers–
Danlos syndrome?” I asked.” You’ve just told me—and
very well—the characteristic findings on PE, but they appear nowhere, either as positives or negatives, in your physical examination. Why not?”
She seemed a bit stunned by my question. “I looked
for them, but I couldn’t see them” she answered.
“Then why did you say she had it?”
“You know, I wondered about it, but everybody else
seemed to think she had it.” She threw up her hands and
stomped her foot, angry at herself. “I know that I should
have said something! But I’m just a student, and I didn’t
want to seem stupid.”
The EMR is a wonderful but dangerous tool. Its capacity for efficient redundancy or, more perniciously, overt
and unedited cut-and-paste from previous notes, allows
doctors—either pressed for time or uncertain of themselves
(as even very good doctors continually are)—to simply replicate their previous notes or parrot the antecedent notes of
another clinician. This poses an increasingly particular
danger for medical students, who tend to believe that everybody else must know more than they do. Yet, it is a
hazard not just for students, but for all of us. Uncritical
acceptance of what others have said is not a new phenomenon in medicine, but it has been much facilitated by the
EMR, a real-world equivalent of the clever huckster weavers of Andersen’s story. His was a cautionary tale, and we
should take a lesson from it: It is only by using our own
senses and minds and taking the time to record only our
own accurate findings and thoughts—and having the ethical imperative and courage to do so—that we can serve
our patients well.

Although I spoke to my team and wrote in my EMR
attending notes of my doubts, recording my physical examinations as specifically showing no current findings for
Ehlers–Danlos and suggesting a possible alternative diagnosis of Munchausen syndrome, I saw no major change of
content in a large number of the subsequent EMR notes by
a variety of other writers. Maybe, unlike the child at the
emperor’s parade in Hans Christian Andersen’s story, I did
not cry out loudly enough to be heard by the crowd.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C007
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: Just Playing Doctor

The first thing I learned from the county hospital: Put
on any color coat, and folks will call you “doc.” Every
time they said it, I breathed a quick reminder that I wasn’t
a doctor, as of yet. Still it felt like a game—putting on my
cloak of illusion and temporarily stepping into a different
world. But, like many others, I was experiencing things
that would be important in either helping me to actually
get there or sending me running in the other direction.
Both receiving and giving training, after all, is a big part of
being a doctor. If you ever thought that career shadowing
was a worthless exercise in babysitting, I assure you that
nothing could be further from the truth. I am a blank
canvas, a dry sponge, the timeless tabula rasa. Paint me a
picture, let me soak up your wisdom, and I’ll understand.
My perspective is a unique one: I’m not a doctor, but I’ve
worked under quite a few of them, and they speak openly
with me. How many nonphysicians get unguarded insight
into medicine? Yet, with each iteration, I got the same
question: Why do you want to go into medicine? It used to
hit like a cruel joke half of the time when I sensed that
what they meant was: “Why would you?” The question
doesn’t bother me now—after dozens of such encounters
I’ve settled on an acceptable answer. But into the stunned
silence of earlier trials, my hosts would often impart their
responses. Concerned physicians stepped in to ask the incoming generations what we were thinking. Is there a reason to it all, or are we just playing doctor?
Are we looking for the challenge, the pursuit and mastery of difficult skills and knowledge? Well, definitely.
Most of us who find ourselves signing on for another 4
years of postbaccalaureate education can hardly be called
slackers. Medicine has been an obvious destination for
bright minds for ages (admissions criteria prove this). And
the challenge cannot be overstated—the work is often
stressful and risky, and the hours can grow long. No one
has lied to the incoming generation of medical students
and told them to expect a cake walk. But the road doesn’t
seem to be quite as rocky as it once was. Many medical
schools have hearkened to the cries of the student body by
instituting reasonable curriculum changes, or reducing the
amount of in-class time. Councils of professionals and
some employers are striving to decrease the hours spent on
the job or on call during residency. New technologies have
taken some of the guesswork away. Admittedly, new headaches have been added in some cases. From my experience,
many veteran physicians (rightly) comport themselves as a
battle-hardened elite and lecture stereotypically on how
comparatively easy I’ll have it. Yet I didn’t sign on because
I wanted to run a course that was uphill both ways.
Are we sniffing around for the money or the lifestyle?
Some from every generation have, but fiscal revelations
aren’t going to blindside my class. No one gets to medical
school without talking to a doctor, and I don’t know any
doctors who have told folks to do it for the paycheck. I’ve
met a few who are unhappy with their pay, some who
don’t think about it, and some who admit to enjoying the
comfort. My nontraditional classmates left positions in
consulting, investment banking, and other lucrative fields
for medicine, and most other people who make up my
class can understand why. Remarks to help orient incoming students this year may only have served to reinforce the
notion that health care as we know it might undergo serious change by the time we’re ready to practice. We’ve
witnessed recent legislative battles over reimbursement. Are
we a special class of risk takers, gambling on the future of
medicine? No, I and most others would not rely solely on
such fragile guarantees.
Do we crave respect and a sense of power? The “Dr.”
honorific has been a self-empowering status symbol for
centuries. But the silent testimony of a wearied, haggard
resident with fresh vomit on his scrub bottoms highlights
that sometimes it’s rather hard to feel respected. You can
tell a person to master delayed gratification, but few would
be willing to endure 4-plus years of such training simply
for the respect of crossing the finish line. More accurately,
many of us struggle to avoid the rote tedium and lack of
individual significance we’ve found elsewhere.
Have we all been swept up in the idea that we simply
want to help people? This would not relegate us to becoming physicians, or even to medicine, but the idea of direct
action is appealing to some. For those who have grown up
in a world that keeps people at arm’s length, increasingly
impersonal and detached, medicine still permits (and requires) intimate contact and connection. If we didn’t grow
up with toy stethoscopes and white coats, we still found
our way to them eventually as we turned from other paths
without as much heart.
These were some of the experiences shared throughout
interview season, and for many, they are a sort of premedical raison d’eˆtre. Although some sounded good to me and
to admissions boards across the country, none of these are
my answer. It was dumb luck that helped me one day as I
found myself in an off-white, tiled operating room, standing scared in the corner when a gruff, rather annoyedlooking orthopedic surgeon walked in with his damp forearms raised as if to ward me off. Looking back, the
operation was unimportant, largely because I had to play a
game of finding a clean line of sight through the jumble of
anesthesia machines and medical personnel. But after an
hour on my feet the blood must have rushed from my
head, because I was all of a sudden brave enough or brash
enough to ask the surgeon what was going on. He started
to give me a look that could have killed, but that would
probably have made more work for him. Instead, he spat
out at me, “This bone is really broken. I’m going to fix it.”
Health care is really broken. Each successive generation of physicians is “going to fix it.” Some are going to
provide that personal touch that’s being taken away. Some
are going to accept careers that demonstrate care for the
greater community and a responsibility for the general welfare. Some are going to realize that they still have energy
after the rigors of today’s training to begin to tackle problems in policy or research. At some level, I’m going to take
a long look at what needs to change and I’m going to
design a solution. I’m going to fix it.
I’m not a doctor yet, but I’ve soaked up a little bit
from quite a few. Thanks are due to every one of them who
shared his or her time, not just with me but with any
inquiring young mind. To some, it meant giving up valuable time and interrupting a routine, but it was an investment that will pay dividends to our entire society. The next
time you have a chance to be that mentor, don’t hesitate.
I’m not afraid of learning from texts, but they aren’t a
complete source. Keep asking me why it is I want to be a
doctor until I am one, and maybe I’ll never forget.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C008
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: Tell Me Not

Fifty-six. What does it feel like? Stop for a moment and
count the stones in front of your feet. The stones are always
there. Sometimes it’s hard to see their shape or color, but if you
gaze long enough, they become clear, distilled beneath the cold
water of the childhood spring that carries away your unsteady
reflection. Reach 56 and wait. Don’t go any further, do not
succumb to the temptation to keep counting—just wait ... .
I came to Yoram’s house in the early afternoon of a
hot, sunny day in the middle of May—a small country
house, neat garden, a couple of rather friendly dogs. The
wooden front door was open, unveiling a pungent smell of
that unique nature that not only tells you with fingerprint
accuracy what family it belongs to but also their ages, loves,
hesitations, and the exact amount of salt they put in the
chicken soup, and in tears.
This time I could detect mashed potatoes, orange zest,
2-day-old bread, wet dust, and a thin scent of sadness.
Then again, that morning it was my scent as well, and the
one thing they don’t teach you in medical school is to
distinguish your own sadness from others’.
“Hello, Dr. Limor.”
Dalia, Yoram’s wife, came from the kitchen wiping
her hands on a plaid IKEA towel. “So nice of you to
come. He is expecting you. They called from the hospital earlier and asked him if the hospice doctor had come
to visit him. Would you believe the audacity of these
people? Fortunately, he doesn’t know the meaning of
this word, and a good thing he doesn’t have the patience
to look it up. It’s just terrible.” She hung the towel on
the door handle.
“We didn’t tell him anything, you know. I think it’s
better that way. At least he has hope. So, please be careful,
he is so vulnerable now. It just breaks my heart to see him
like this. It’s like he is becoming more transparent every
day, and I rub my eyes and squint but still cannot help that
feeling. It upsets him when I stare, so I try to leave him
alone a little . . .”
Dalia turned away and went back to the kitchen. “I’ll
bring you a glass of water. It’s so hot today.” She was
crying. Please be careful ...
Yoram sat on his unmade bed watching “Jamie Oliver’s Happy Days.” A bowl of fruit on the dresser was full
and almost untouched—that is, if you ignored the flies for
which the feast was as pleasant as it was undisturbed. They
hovered around the peaches and slowly rotting pears,
landed, and took flight again. This magnificent spectacle
was accompanied by such buzzing that it almost drowned
out the cooking show on the small and ancient Sony. I
remember thinking that this fly buzz was the first lively
sound I had heard in the house that morning, and for
many mornings afterward it remained the only vivid sound
of life. Strangely, life came back to the house after Yoram
had left it, but maybe it had been hiding there all the time
and I just couldn’t see it.
I was totally baffled by Dalia’s request. Not to tell
him? It’s a home hospice we’re talking about here, for
God’s sake, not to mention that it’s my first time. He
should have been informed, and certainly not by me.
What about all my rehearsals? The never-look-down
and the steady-voice rules, the simple but sincere truths on
death being an integral and inevitable part of life for us
all—it’s only a matter of time. The plans I had for him: to
watch all of Woody Allen’s movies before he dies, to peacefully say goodbye to his sons, his wife, his friends. He has
at least 3 months; it’s a lot of time, really. Maybe choose a
good place to be buried in the kibbutz cemetery, to do
things he was dreaming of and had never accomplished, go
to great restaurants, maybe go to see Jerusalem for the last
time . . . I don’t know. We’ve never met, but he obviously
has dreams, so why not tell him? Why deny him all of the
last things he could do? And what about the will? It’s a bit
cynical, of course, but let’s be realistic—this is life. He has
three sons, after all.
Besides, how can he be so blind? He knows he has
cancer, he’s lost 30 kilograms, they stopped treatment—
what else does a person need to figure it out? What
about his oncologists? Don’t they have some sort of
code?
If I were in his place, I would like to know. I definitely, undoubtedly would.
Nanna Lea? I would certainly tell her. I was only 6;
fortunately, she died in her sleep. Dad? Actually, I did. Not
me, of course. Dr. Yakobson did. Dad died in the hospital
alone, he didn’t even say goodbye to me and Lior. They
merely told us he had passed away. They said he had been
very sad and didn’t want to see anyone. It must have been
depression, but now we have drugs for that. So, a person
can die happier nowadays? Maybe that’s not so absurd.
Maybe.
I heaved a sigh. All this time, I had been standing two
steps behind Yoram, but he was completely preoccupied
with the TV show, or maybe the buzz was too loud for him
to hear me breathing.
Gadi? Would I tell him? It’s such a dreadful thought.
Would I? His jocular eyes appeared before me. Would you
want me to tell you? Would you trade the loneliness and
despair for the last days of unawareness, fulfillment of dreams,
the most intense love I could wrap you in? His eyes faded,
leaving tears in mine. It’s unfair; it is f***ing unfair! I whispered the last two words, the buzz stopped, and Yoram
turned to me smiling.
“Good morning, Doctor. It’s a wonderful morning
isn’t it? So kind of you to come. I feel much better today,
you know. Yesterday, some nice girl in the hospital told me I could really improve in the next couple of months. What
do you think?”
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C009
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: The Waiting Room

Roman had been in the hospital for 7 days, and no one
had visited him. He had been diagnosed with metastatic lung cancer after losing pounds from an already thin
frame. He had not been very active since retirement, but
the cancer left him even more sedentary, and he had to
move into a nursing home. He was admitted to us on this
occasion with pneumonia. Because the infection was located in his upper lung, we uncovered a distant history of
tuberculosis exposure and moved him to a negativepressure isolation room.
Each morning, wearing suffocating baby-blue isolation
masks, we entered one door and knocked on the second to
find our patient hidden inside, wooden and silent like a
Russian doll. He did not have many hobbies and was not
much of a reader. Most mornings we would find him lying
in bed and staring at the ceiling, wearing thick glasses that
seemed to weigh more than he did and left moist, red welts
on the bridge of his nose.
Roman was 68 years old. He had worked as a carpenter, then as a welder, and finally as a salesman. He had
served in the Army but did not talk much about his experience. His wife had died 10 years ago, and he had been
living alone until the cancer left him too weak to manage
on his own.
Years ago, he had been told that he had diabetes and
made a point of staying away from cookies and potatoes.
He also smoked heavily and was never able to kick the
habit. He realized he had only months left, and his voice
was steady when saying he was not ready to give up. He
wanted to live as long as possible and wanted “everything
done.”
His hospital room was like a waiting room— clean,
sterile, and value-neutral to the point of blandness. It was
meticulously devoid of any of the signs that accompany
patients with histories. There were no red-eyed pictures of
sons, aunts, adoptive grandparents, hard-smiling mothers,
or half-lidded uncles. There were no oddly shaped, dark
wood trinkets from the Caribbean. There were no bowls or
plates, no collection of glass figurines or mugs.
Each morning, we stuffed ourselves into our masks
and then into this borrowed room and asked what we
could do to make him more comfortable. Perhaps a magazine, a chaplain, or a chat. He was very pleasant but not
ingratiating— calm, almost aloof. He was polite but didn’t
have much to say. We asked how he was feeling. His cough
was improving. He had no fevers the night before. He
admitted to craving a cigarette. But he made no mention
of a friend or an old neighbor. There was no personal
connection anchoring him to the world. The stillness of
that space was uncomfortable, and we sought to ease this
discomfort by swaddling it with a diagnosis. Maybe he was
depressed? We asked in several different ways, but no, he
“was not depressed,” he said. He just had a lot to think
about.
He had a topographic face. The deep crevasses of his
cheeks highlighted a mountain of a nose. Parallel streams
ran across a chronically furrowed brow. I could picture the
smoke curl up from his cigarette, find purchase on his face,
and work its way into a crevice.
I can still picture this because I still think about his
loneliness. He was in his final months of life, and there was
no one we could call to break the news to. No one he had
known longer than a few days to hold his hand, no one to
help him make decisions, and no one to help keep his
financial affairs in order. Usually after a day or two, props
from our patients’ lives creep in and change the set. But in
Roman’s room, there were no block-lettered cards from
grandchildren and no photo collages. There was no evidence of fried chicken contraband from an evening family
visit. There were no half-finished crosswords or dog-eared
cowboy novels to suggest he had spent any time outside his
own thoughts. His face seemed to say that a lifetime of
circumstance and choices had led to this isolation. He was
coming to face his own regrets within our whitewashed
hospital walls.
The hospital is the sieve that catches many of us at our
most delicate and trying moments. Diplomats, teachers,
presidents, paupers, and inmates all lay side by side on this
grate, and every one of them has a doctor. We get exposed
to a multitude of emotions and experiences, and with
many of these—anger, fright, gratitude—I have an improvisational rapport. Roman’s loneliness, though, confounded
and devastated me. I have cared for several patients over
the years whose palpable loneliness still shocks me. And
this is not loneliness that 5 minutes of handholding or a
visit from the volunteer dog can fix. This is institutionalized loneliness, refractory loneliness, the end stage of a life
that has somehow not gone as planned. It is mixed with
the memory of poor choices and their residual regret. I am
sometimes witness to tragedy that I cannot define, diagnose, manage, or cure. I am increasingly aware of the tragedy of social isolation, but I have a hard time understanding it. The mechanism of disease—if one can call it
that—is too overwhelming, too multifaceted. Social isolation is not a medical illness in the way that I was taught to
think about illness, but it is often the ubiquitous fact that
envelops every medical decision and even haunts the way I
think about a patient’s terminal illness.
I have never asked a patient why he or she and society
had parted ways, but in quiet moments, I occasionally
think about it. Sometimes clues present themselves: an offhand remark about an accident, a history of incarceration
or drug abuse, or a financial dispute with a family member.
Roman, however, did not offer many clues. The next-ofkin information in his chart was blank. He had a daughter, but they had not spoken in years. I don’t know why.
Sometimes it’s better not to know—sometimes too much
history can corrupt empathy.
Roman would die soon, and no one who knew his
thoughts or his history would be there to witness it. Even if
he had made mistakes, a death not mourned is a tragedy in
our rich society. Maybe society had failed him. We did not
rush in to mortar the gaps.
I realize that in thinking about him, we have drifted
far from our medical mooring. I could stage his lung cancer and offer him a nicotine patch, but these are not the
real problems that have washed up on our beachhead. The
hospital is the net that catches societal tragedy all the time,
but I struggle with the realization that medicine does not
have all the answers.
One morning, I again put on the isolation mask and
prepared to knock on Roman’s door. Moving to the left, I
caught sight of him sitting on the edge of the bed, a figure
framed by the door’s rectangular window. It was a perverse
Vermeer. Light streaming through the window, pushing
through the dark interior, illuminating his face and his
knobby hands set carefully upon his lap. His face was upturned to the sky, and I imagined he was looking for answers, searching for closure, trying to come to terms with
the way life had turned out. He sat patiently and was
waiting.
He was waiting for a philosopher, a prophet, a king.
He nervously anticipated his historian, his ghosts, his
usher. He was not waiting for his doctor.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C010
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: A Case of Racism and Reconciliation

One of my first patients as a medical intern was an
avowed racist. Chester (pseudonym) was a lifelong
smoker and fan of Southern cuisine whose bad habits finally caught up with him. His body failing, he turned to
our hospital for help only to find me, a black man, as one
of the doctors entrusted to extend his life. The year was
2003, but for a time, it felt more like 1963.
My resident received the call from the emergency department about our new admission just as we were sitting
down for dinner. With the call went my appetite. I was
struggling with the adjustment to internship like everyone
else, perhaps more so given my recent 3-year hiatus to
study law, so the last thing I needed was something to
make my life even more difficult. But that is exactly what
Chester and his family had in store for me.
On our way to Chester’s bed in the emergency department, a nurse stepped in front of my path to warn me.
“Watch out for that one,” she said, through a thick Caribbean accent.
“Why?” I asked.
I expected her to say he was severely agitated or confused. Instead, she leaned toward me and lowered her
voice. “He asked a white nurse why there are ‘so many
niggers’ working here, and said that he did not want any
‘niggers’ taking care of him.”
“What?” I asked, in disbelief.
I glanced at my colleagues: a white male medical student and a Jewish woman who was our supervising resident. It took a few seconds for the resident to regain her
composure. “Don’t worry,” she said. “You don’t have to go
in.”
“I’ll be fine,” I said, as I took a deep breath, “but
maybe you should do the talking.”
Chester looked the part of a hospital patient. A scraggly beard covered much of his ashen face. His abdomen
protruded as if carrying a full-term pregnancy. His wrinkled hands trembled while adjusting the rubber tubing that
fed him oxygen. He smelled as if he had gone days, maybe
weeks, without a bath. After introductions, Chester grimaced as he strained to lift his head off the pillow. His
voice was feeble and raspy. “Where’s my real doctor?” he
asked.
It’s common for patients to question the competence
of interns and residents and to ask for the attending doctor.
But with what the nurse had told me, his words took on a
sinister tone.
Although the resident tried to explain that we were his
real doctors, Chester looked past her, scowling at me before his eyes rested on the medical student. “I only wanna
deal with you.”
Our student looked at us with a deer-in-headlights
gaze. The resident clenched her hand, snapping the hook
on her ink pen in half. “I’m in charge, so either you answer
my questions, or we find another doctor, which could take
hours.”
Chester looked around as he weighed his options. His
physical distress was more important than his mental prejudices. “Damn you,” he said.
The resident and I gritted our teeth as we worked in
tandem and took the usual medical history and performed
a physical examination. Given all the data, pneumonia was
the most likely diagnosis. We wrote admission orders and
moved on to other work during the overnight shift. As I
plodded through each successive patient and hour without
sleep, I could not get Chester out of my mind. Prejudice
toward black doctors is nothing new, but it was one thing
to read about it or hear others recount their experiences
and quite another to feel it for myself.
Chester was the first person we saw on morning
rounds the next day. We took a collective deep breath as
we entered his room: “Good morning,” the resident said,
half-heartedly.
Chester shook his head. He was unhappy to discover
that we were still his doctors.
A middle-aged woman and young man sat at his bedside. The woman gruffly introduced herself as his oldest
daughter. She wore a T-shirt that proudly displayed the
Confederate flag across sagging breasts. Her son wore a
crew cut and had thin forearms covered with tattoos. His
shirt had a smaller Confederate flag on its pocket. Together, they looked the part of people who might traffic in
N-words.
As we left the room, the resident suggested trading
Chester to our sister team, where both doctors were white
men. Such a change would have required going up the
hospital chain of command. I resisted. No matter if she
was the one making the request; given the racial element, it
would seem that I was the reason behind it. As the lowest
person on the medical hierarchy, this was not the way I
wanted to start my career. So, I convinced her that everything would be fine if we stuck to the medical facts.
In the beginning, that is what we did. Each day, I
updated the family on his progress. Gradually, however, in
the process of tending to his physical ills, I learned tidbits
about his life. He was married for almost 50 years and took
care of his wife in her final months after a crippling stroke.
They had 3 daughters and 7 grandkids. He worked in a
factory most of his life. He loved fishing and baseball.
About 2 weeks into his stay, he finally acknowledged
me as a doctor when I asked him one morning how he felt.
“Okay, Doc. I’m gettin’ better.”
His daughter softened, too, as she asked about my
personal life. “You got a family?”
“I’m engaged,” I said. “No kids.”
“You’ll have to stop workin’ so hard if you ever wanna
settle down.”

Tension oozed from my back and shoulders. For the
first time, I felt relaxed around them. It was as if I was
having a regular conversation with regular people—not
ones who wanted to see me locked up in prison or strung
from a tree.
Although I made inroads with earning their trust, our
medical efforts ultimately proved futile. We discovered that
his pneumonia stemmed from aggressive lung cancer that
had metastasized to his liver. He also developed a multiresistant infection and acute renal failure. The verdict was in:
Chester was dying, and dying soon.
After some early dissension, his family agreed to sign a
DNR order. The moment came just days later. Shortly
after I arrived for my weekend shift, I received a page from
a nursing station. I returned the call. “Your patient has
died,” a nurse said without emotion.
When I approached Chester’s bedside, the room was
filled. A pack of cloudy eyes honed in on me. I recognized
his daughters and some of his grandkids; the rest were new.
I introduced myself to those I had not met as I made my
way to Chester. His eyes were closed. A blanket covered
him from the shoulders down. He had not been dead long
enough to look different than he had in life. My medical
job was easy enough, as I did the formal routine of declaring him dead.
I looked up at his family, scanning from one to the
next. “I’m sorry for your loss.” After I let that linger for a
few seconds, I asked, “Does anyone have questions?”
I had grown so accustomed to asking this to family
members of the living that it slipped from my mouth without a thought. What question could they have other than,
“Why couldn’t you save him?” Suddenly on the defensive,
I braced for racially tinged criticism and maybe even
threats of a lawsuit. But what came from their mouths was
the opposite of hate.
“Thanks for all you did for my daddy,” his eldest
daughter said.
“We appreciate all the time you spent with him,” another daughter said.
I nodded, unable to produce an intelligible response.
It was all I could do to leave the room without stumbling
against a wall. Their kind words were the way families
reacted when they felt their dead loved ones had been
treated with complete dignity. It was a response that I did
not expect.
Despite the flashes of humanity he showed toward the
end, I regarded Chester and his family in a mostly negative
light. Like many blacks do, I countered their prejudice
with my own: To my eyes, they were high-school dropout,
Dixie-flag waving, trailer-park residents; people I saw as
fundamentally beneath me. My family and community
had raised me to feel this way, and without much thought,
I had obliged. Yet, here was Chester’s progeny, heirs to his
bigoted ways, offering nothing but genuine gratitude. Suddenly, I felt like the racist fool.
Three decades of indoctrination had come under assault. No longer would I be able to so easily cast people like
them in such a monolithic fashion. Given how things
started between us, it seemed our interactions had changed
their perspective, too. Although I might never come over
for dinner or marry their daughter, I had played a vital role
in something far more crucial—life and death— and they
had been pleased with what I had to offer. In the end, at
least for a moment in time, a polarizing black and white
landscape had turned a more neutral and friendly gray.
Nowadays, whenever I feel myself on the receiving end of a
prejudiced patient or becoming biased against someone
based on their appearance or background, I think back to
Chester and his family. Our encounter showed that both
sides are capable of something better.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C011
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: When We Became Rich

I
t was a rather difficult faculty meeting. The entire time
was given to the director of the faculty practice plan, who
went over our tenuous financial situation, emphasizing that
revenues were down and that we were not likely to get a
raise or a bonus at the end of the year. In discussing the
possible remedies, he suggested that we consider reducing
some of the frills that we currently enjoyed, the number
of fellows that the department was paying, or the educational allowance provided each faculty member. Finally, he
warned us that unless we turned around the downward
trend of the department income, we might need to make
some cuts in compensation.
I couldn’t help but think back to how all of this “prosperity” started. When I was in medical school during the
early 1960s, there was no talk about health care costs,
length of stay, or diagnosis-related groups. We lived in
blissful ignorance of the entire issue of who was paying
for the care of our patients. We were exposed only to the
charity patients on the ward service and had next to nothing to do with patients on the private service. In fact, the
only thing I knew about the private service was what my
advisor told me— do not apply for a private service internship because “the attending will not let you do anything.”
With this advice in mind, I started my medical internship
in a hospital that had mostly nonprivate patients.
During our orientation, not a single word was devoted
to the cost of medical care. In fact, the only time any
discussion involved money was when we (the medical interns) discovered that the hospital administration trainees
were paid four times as much as we were. We then sent a
deputation to meet with the hospital director about this
salary discrepancy. The response was that the hospital had
to pay the administration trainees more because they were
“college graduates.”
All admitted patients were initially seen by a medical
student before the housestaff to ensure that the students
would develop adequate history-taking skills. Except in
life-threatening emergencies, these rules were inviolate.
When the chairman himself was admitted for some diagnostic tests, he insisted that the medical student see him
first. He then severely berated the student for not performing a rectal examination.
Attending rounds were of variable length and quality.
We had several truly great attendings who challenged us
every day to think in terms of pathophysiology and spent
time with the students, honing their skills in summarizing
and presenting their findings. The students were an integral part of rounds and were expected to read about all of
the patients and help with the scut work.
In January 1966, everything suddenly changed. We
were never warned about the forthcoming upheaval. We
had never heard the term “Medicaid.” The only visible
change in our daily life was that I suddenly had many more
forms to fill out on recently discharged patients.
Sometime during the latter part of February, a check
for $1800 made out to me showed up in my mailbox. It
obviously was not mine, because my annual stipend was
$3150. The check was from an insurance company that
was the local carrier for Medicaid. I took the check to the
medicine office and gave it to the senior secretary. As soon
as she saw its distinctive color, she immediately knew what
it was. Her only comment was, “Oh, it’s one of those!” She
then opened a drawer and pulled out a large stack of similar checks, held together by a wide rubber band.
Although I received a few more similar checks, I
stopped thinking about them because someone in the medicine office clearly was in charge of the monies. This blissful state of ignorance was suddenly brought to a halt several weeks later during our weekly department meeting.
The meeting included the housestaff as well as the faculty
and dealt with patient care and medical education issues.
Unlike all previous meetings, the chairman immediately departed from the usual agenda. He brought with
him the large stack of checks. He put these on the lectern,
saying that the current situation was unprecedented. He
asked the audience for their advice on how to dispose of
the money. He thought that these funds should be distributed to the housestaff because, in fact, they took care of the
patients.
As soon as he finished that sentence, pandemonium
broke out—multiple faculty members started to speak at
once, and we (the housestaff) sat dumbfounded. The meeting rapidly spun out of control and ended with no resolution relating to the distribution of the newly acquired
largesse.
The next week, a group of dark-suited men with expensive briefcases showed up to work out the details of the
embryonic faculty practice plan. The housestaff were never
again invited to attend faculty meetings that were now
devoted exclusively to discussions about money. At first,
not much changed in the daily routine of the hospital, but
soon we noticed that several young physicians came to visit
and gave grand rounds.
By the next year, a few of these visitors joined the
faculty in the various subspecialties of internal medicine.
After my chief residency, I joined the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention and eventually returned to the faculty 2 years later as a newly minted junior faculty member.
The most notable change was the presence of many new
faculty members in various subspecialties of internal medicine, more than doubling the size of the previously small
faculty. This welcome change came about because of the
sudden availability of new funds in the practice plan.
In the 45-plus years after my resident days, the financial aspects of the entire health care system continued to evolve and the changes have been profound and lasting.
During these years, we have learned to live with diagnosisrelated groups, direct and indirect medical education payments to the hospitals by Medicare, extensive and punitive
“fraud and abuse” investigations of university medical centers by Medicare, markedly increased demands for documentation, and the addition of compliance officers to the
practice plan to avoid being accused of “fraud and abuse”
due to “upcoding.”
These changes were followed by the work-hour limitations for house officers and the implementation of the
electronic medical record, where a single keystroke can
generate an entire page of standardized (and useless) history designed to milk the maximum reimbursement from
the “payer sources,” and where “cut and paste” has led to
hundreds of pages of identical, extensive, and uninformative notes from every person in contact with the patient.
Although the electronic medical record has markedly improved the quality and efficiency of medical care, it is important to remember that the impetus to develop it was
primarily to facilitate billing.
Along with all of these changes, caring for the patient
remained the one constant. The development of evidencebased medicine rationalized therapeutic decisions. Ready
access to electronic references is now at one’s fingertips,
allowing all of us to get and use the best and most recent
information available. The development of order sets has
assured a degree of consistency in the level of care, but at
the cost of eliminating the need for reflection and critical
thinking by the house officer.
The relentless pressure for reduced length of stay has
created an avalanche of paperwork that has to be completed by the house officer, all too frequently during the
hours set aside for teaching rounds, limiting time for discussion of potentially important considerations for patient
care. Finally, the typing of extensive and redundant daily
notes has replaced the narrative text, which was an important stimulus of critical thinking.
During the past 45 years of making attending rounds,
I learned all of the new fads, mastered the use of the computer, became familiar with the lingo of modern statistics,
and can even define and calculate “prior probability.” It is
just not as much fun...
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C012
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: A New Reality

Standing at 6 feet, 4 inches tall, I am easily spotted by
my friends and colleagues in the daily rush of people
moving through the hallways at the hospital. When you
add my thin build and comically short white coat to the
picture, I never exactly blend into the crowd. One day,
near the beginning of my third year of medical school, I
was standing in the lobby waiting for an elevator when a
boy walked by, holding his mom’s hand. He suddenly
stopped dead in his tracks, pointed up at me, and said:
“Look, Mommy! Tall!”
“I’ve told you it’s rude to stare!” the mom said, quickly
pulling her child away.
I laughed awkwardly as I stepped onto the elevator.
After all, hardly a week had gone by since I had begun
clinical rotations that a patient or family member had not
commented on my height as I walked into their room. It
had become a source of pride, a part of my daily routine. It
was normal.
Four months later, I found myself in that same elevator, grimacing and trying to hide my pain from the other
passengers. For the past month, I had been waking in the
early morning hours with terrible discomfort in my right
leg. The deep ache would keep me awake for an hour or so
before the fatigue from the long hours of surgery and deliveries would catch up with me and pull me back into a
deep sleep. That morning, though, the soreness had not
faded. By the time I left the labor and delivery ward at the
end of my shift, my leg and abdomen were on fire with a
pain that grew worse with every movement.
As I stepped off the elevator and walked through the
doors of the emergency department, thoughts of “med student syndrome” ran through my head. This is probably
nothing but gas and my imagination running wild.
As the resident and attending physician finished their
examinations, I was convinced that I should have spent the
evening studying (or at least watching TV) rather than
humiliating myself in front of future colleagues.
A couple of hours later, the emergency medicine attending physician walked into my room and slid the glass
door closed behind him. His friendly, optimistic countenance from earlier that evening was gone, replaced by another: the all-too-familiar expression that I—even in my
short career—recognized as the look of a doctor who was
about to deliver bad news.
“I just read your CT scan. Your appendix looks normal, but there’s a large mass in your pelvis. The official
read from radiology isn’t back yet, but it looks suspicious
for a hematoma versus a benign tumor versus some type of
sarcoma...”
I remember very little of what he said after that.
For the third time in this story, I found myself in that
exact same elevator. As I sat silently in my wheelchair on
the way to my hospital room, I looked up at the nurses and
doctors about to begin their daily routine—my daily routine. In that moment, I would have given anything for my
life to just go back to normal.
The next week was a blur of scans, biopsies, and consultations from seemingly every service in the hospital. I
will never forget the expressions on my parents’ faces as the
doctor delivered the biopsy results. My father—a man who
always had an answer for every question and a solution to
any problem—looked absolutely helpless as he asked, “Ewing’s sarcoma? Scott, what does that mean?”
I sat there silently, unable to answer him.
This couldn’t be happening to me. I’m supposed to be
the one treating people and going home at the end of the
day.
Despite all the love I had surrounding me from family
and friends, I felt utterly alone. The people who truly cared
about me and the people who were caring for me seemed to
be two separate groups. I never had trouble feeling considerable sympathy for my patients, but genuine empathy?
Could these doctors possibly know how my parents used to
tell me bedtime stories about foxes or how I used to dream
about being a fighter pilot when I grew up? Why would
they need to know that? They were going to provide medical care and nothing more. For me, that had been normal.
Just as I was preparing to leave the hospital, I heard a
knock at the door, and a rather short woman in a long
white coat entered the room. She introduced herself as the
hematology–oncology fellow who would be taking care of
me over the next several months. I was impressed by both
her kindness and her knowledge as we talked about my
immediate prognosis and long-term expectations. As she
sat at the foot of my bed listening to me talk about how
eager I was to get back to school, however, something
changed. To this day I don’t know if it was just my imagination, but I could have sworn that I saw her eyes start to
tear up. Here was someone who, despite meeting me only
15 minutes ago, seemed to care about what happened to
me. Just for an instant, all of the loneliness and turmoil of
the previous week melted away and were replaced by a new
feeling—peace. Maybe the group of people who were caring for me did not have to be separate from those who
cared about me after all.
For the next 10 months, I was wheeled through the
very same hallways in which I had once towered over others. I would often look up at the doctors (and even medical
students) who, despite working with me only months before, no longer even recognized me. I would have given
anything to go back to how life had been before my diagnosis. At the same time, though, I began to understand
both the joys and frustrations my patients had been experiencing each day. I even witnessed how the terror of contracting an infection without a working immune system could be driven away by a nursing assistant with a welltimed orange Popsicle delivery in the middle of the night.
Finally, radiation and 17 cycles of chemotherapy had
done their job, and it was time to return to school. During
my first week back, I found myself standing in the same
elevator, once again wearing my comically short white
coat. A woman walked onto the elevator carrying her
young daughter, who looked over at me with an amazed
expression on her face.
“Yes, he’s very tall isn’t he, sweetie?” Her mom observed with a laugh.
I couldn’t help grinning as I stepped out of the elevator and into the child psychiatry unit where I was just
beginning my rotation. Just as I had hoped and prayed for
since the early days of my illness, things were finally back
to normal.
That day, a 16-year-old girl arrived on our floor after a
suicide attempt. I spent that afternoon speaking with her
and her family, trying to understand the events that had
nearly led to tragedy. At the end of the day, I headed back
to my apartment with a heavy heart. I kept thinking
about the expression of helplessness on her mother’s
face, and how it reminded me of my own mother only a
year ago. As I tried to fall asleep that night, I could
picture her mom sitting in an empty house, just wishing
that she could have her daughter safely home with her.
As I encountered more patients on the wards, I kept
coming home worried about them and imagining myself
in their positions. Though I was doing well in my rotations and was relating to patients in an exciting and
meaningful new way, I found that doing my job had
actually become more difficult than ever before. 
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C013
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: One Thousand Kilometers

It wasn’t until midsummer when I finally managed to visit my
friend, a family physician in a southeastern city in Iran near
the Pakistan border. We had worked jointly on a few medical
research projects, and at the time he was fulfilling a public
service obligation, as was his wife in a nearby town.
I arrived, drained, at his office as dusk fell. His setup was
just as I had imagined: a weather-beaten building, rudimentary equipment, a very basic medication cabinet, a few rooms
in which to see patients, a terraced residence in the rear, and a
dilapidated Land Rover next to the beat-up ambulance. My
friend read my thoughts from the look on my face.
“You get used to it,” he said.
“I’m supposed to leave early in the morning,” I
murmured.
We sat in his office to catch up just as the call came
from his wife. Doubled over from an acute attack of abdominal pain, she was on the way to the local hospital. She
needed him.
Throwing on his coat, my friend asked, “Cover me for a
few hours. I’ll be back soon.” Again he read my face. “You’re
it. It’s just you. But nothing happens at night. Anyway, you
have my number,” he shouted over his shoulder.
Here I was, suddenly alone, with the silent, bitter-cold
night of the desert, the chirping of crickets, the distant
barking dogs. I turned on the radio for company and
started working at my laptop. It was past midnight when I
heard a knock at the door. I was apprehensive and did not
answer at first. The knocking was repeated again and again.
“Who is it?” I asked, in Persian.
The answer came in English. “Please open the door.
We need help. Please!”
I opened the door to a Pakistani family. A worn, withered man embraced a small girl of about 5. A woman,
utterly exhausted, held something wrapped in her arms. I
assumed it was an infant. I caught their anxiety, their
panic. I reflexively let them in. The mother unwrapped the
infant and a stench filled the air. The little girl started
crying. I saw a half-naked, dehydrated infant lying immobile in diarrhea. I thought he might be dead. I moved
closer and heard his gasping breath.
“Quickly! Wash your baby under the tap.” I ran to
find a catheter and an IV setup.
I opened the window and the door to let in fresh air,
placed the setup and the catheter by the infant, and gave
his mother a towel to dry him. I searched the cabinet to
find IV fluids and when I turned back, I saw that the
mother had inserted the catheter and started the IV.
Her husband explained. “She works in a clinic in Pakistan and knows some procedures.” I nodded.
Thank goodness, I thought to myself. I had been worrying about getting venous access in this infant. I connected the IV fluids and checked his vital signs.
“Where have you come from?” I asked.
“We are from Pakistan. We were displaced because of
the flood,” the man replied.
“But that flood is far to the East, very distant from
here . . . .How—”
The man interrupted. “I am a school teacher. The
flood washed everything away. We lost everything. We had
no other choice but to come to a friend of mine who lives
in Iran. We walked. We came 1000 km in 6 days and were
kept at the border for 2 days. They would not let us in. We
had no papers. Our situation got worse. My son got sick,
and no medical care was available.”
I searched my pack and found chocolate and biscuits.
They were ravenous and thirsty. I gave the small girl the
chocolate and the parents the biscuits.
The man continued. “I found an Afghani near the border
who told me he would take us into Iran for no charge. We followed him, all of us—my wife, my daughters, and my son.”
“Your daughters?” I interrupted him. At this, the man
began to weep. The mother turned her face to conceal her
tears, and the little girl hugged her father frantically. The
man spoke through his tears. “In the mountains the Afghani and his friend demanded money; we had agreed
there would be no charge. I told them that we had no
money. They threatened to leave us alone in the mountains
to die unless I gave them my daughter. He said he wanted
a wife. I told him that she was only a child, but he insisted
that she was ready for marriage.”
My mouth hung open in horror. He continued. “That
seemed the only way to save us. They took us near this city
and went into the mountains with our daughter...”
I was in shock. Having 2 daughters of my own, I could
empathize deeply with this man. I raised my head and managed to say, “That was the best decision in that situation—
your only option. I know that police will help you get your
daughter back.”
The man quickly replied. “Please do not call the police. They will only send us back, and we will not get our
daughter back.”
“You need to get some rest. Let me find something for you.”
I went to the next room and called my friend, speaking in
Persian. I subconsciously noted the father’s apprehension, that
I might be calling the police or the officials, whereas I was
merely asking for some blankets and the way to get into the
residence. When I returned to the office, no one was there.
They were gone. I searched around the clinic but found
no sign of them. The man had not known that I was just a
visiting friend, that I had been calling this friend to whom I
spoke Persian. Protecting his family, the man assumed I was
speaking with the authorities, and he fled with them.
I looked for them. I searched throughout the city the
next day, as you would have. I never found them. I had lost
them. I doubted that I would ever experience the loss of a
patient such as this again.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C014
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: Death Panels

“He is 69 years old, on an experimental treatment for
metastatic colon cancer, and he has free air,” explained the emergency department physician. It was a Sunday afternoon, and I was the surgeon on call.
The CT scan had been done without intravenous contrast, and the cava was flat, from which I inferred that his
renal function was poor. He had liver metastases, but there
was still plenty of normal liver, and the metastases alone
would not explain this much ascites. There was scattered
free air, but too much ascites to be from an acute perforation, and the pleural effusions suggested a more chronic
process. There was so much edema of the soft tissues that
the interface between fat, muscle, and bowel had been lost.
This was not a man who had been holding his own against
metastatic cancer; this was a man who had been in the
process of dying for some time, and then he perforated.
From the scan, I knew that his lab results would show
elevated creatinine, anemia, and profound hypoalbuminemia. I knew what the tissues would look like in the operating room, and I had a pretty good idea what the ICU
would look like postoperatively—the ventilator, the drips,
the days or weeks ahead. As I gathered myself and headed
to his room, I realized that my job would be to explain to
him that we could operate, but we could not heal him.
“Enough is enough; we need to let you go”—this is a
tough message to give to a stranger, especially one who has
the means and motivation to cycle through all of the conventional treatments for colon cancer and then seek experimental options. Why in the world should he trust me?, I
wondered.
She was a quiet, elegant woman with shoulder-length,
silver hair, a gray sweater, long wool skirt, and sensible
shoes. She stood closely by his side, her arms clasping a
notebook to her chest. His mouth agape, his breathing was
deep and rhythmic, too regular, and too fast—a sign of
sepsis. I introduced myself, confirmed that she was his
wife, and gently shook him awake until his eyes opened.
He focused, though only for a moment.
He didn’t respond to my questions, so his wife did the
talking. I took my time, asking about more than I needed
to: his symptoms, the onset of pain, past treatments and
the experimental protocol, his strength, weight, quality of
life these past days and weeks, how many children they had
and where they lived, how long they had been married,
what work he was doing or did. I listened to his lungs and
his heart, and I looked for a long time at his hands—the
fragile skin and the stark crevasses between the carpal
bones where the interosseus muscles were supposed to be. I
didn’t need to touch his abdomen; it was obvious from the
way that he was breathing that he had peritonitis, and I
knew from the CT that he had a perforation. I gathered
the information carefully and methodically, because I
needed to be certain that I had not made a mistake. Just as
important, I needed them to be confident that I knew who
he was, that I knew what had happened, and that I knew
what we should do. I needed them to trust me with what I
was about to tell them.
His wife had durable power of attorney, but they had
not discussed limits on his care, how far to carry things,
what to do when the treatment stopped working, or when
the end was in sight. They hadn’t discussed it with their
local oncologist—an experienced, wonderful physician
who is smart and compulsive and kind, and who I would
let care for my own family. He happened to be out of town
that day, or I would have gladly deferred this discussion to
him. They didn’t discuss it with their oncologist at the
university, whom I know well. He defies the stereotype of
an academic oncologist—an attending who carries a pager,
knows his patients personally, and combines the best of
academic expertise and human compassion. They didn’t
discuss it with their primary care physician, who had cared
for him for over a decade, but whom he had seen only
rarely since he started cancer treatment. All of them knew
that he would die of his cancer. None of them had discussed this moment—what happens at the end.
“This is what I believe has happened,” I explained.
“These are the things that can be done. We can operate,
but we would have to leave him on the ventilator.”
Slowly, I shifted from talking about you to talking
about him, when his eyes did not open, when he showed
no sign that he heard what I was saying. I was taking care
of her now, as much as I was taking care of him. I was
touched by her bravery.
“Under the best of circumstances, I wouldn’t expect to
be able to take him off the ventilator for days or weeks; I
doubt that he would leave the ICU. I would not expect
him to survive to leave the hospital; he is not likely ever to
be well enough to get more treatment for his cancer. Do
you know what he would want?”
She had not asked a single question, and her expression gave me no hint of what she was feeling. I had tried to
be gentle, but I felt cruel and blunt and ashamed of myself,
as I bludgeoned her with this explanation. I was a stranger
to this woman. What gave me the right to say these things?
“Can I take him home?” she asked. “I want to take
him home.” Just like that.
It took one call to hospice. Three hours later, he was
home. He had pain medication. Their children arrived.
That afternoon, he died peacefully in the bed that he had
shared with his wife for more than 40 years.
It took me a couple of hours that Sunday to do my
work. It would have taken much longer to have prepared
him for the operating room and completed his surgery.
From the operating room he would have gone to the ICU,
where we would have kept him alive on a ventilator for
quite a long time, because we are very good at supporting blood pressure and ventilation. A week later he might have
been a little better but still on the ventilator, with a tube in
his trachea and one in his stomach, another in his bladder,
a central line or two, perhaps a rectal tube. He would be
swollen, his fragile skin would blister, and he would not
know where he was. At least he would not be in pain.
When patients survive ICU stays like this, they don’t tell
me that they remember the pain much. At the end of the
week, we would be discussing withdrawal of support, but
it’s unlikely that we would be able to have a meaningful
discussion with him. His care would cost tens of thousands
of dollars in the first couple of days; in a month, hundreds
of thousands. His cancer would go untreated.
I should not have been called to see this patient. Decisions like the one we had to make that day should have
been made among friends and family or in the company of
his family physician or oncologist, at a time when he was
awake and at his best, when he was not in pain, and he
could remember who he was and he could explain to those
he would leave behind how he wanted to be remembered.
To have to make such decisions the way we did that day—
counseled by a stranger in the sterile alcove of a busy emergency room—is not what any of us would want. That it
turned out the way it did, I believe, was fortunate. It would
have been so easy for the powerful momentum of modern
medicine to have carried his broken body into the operating room and from there to the ICU, where he would be
nurtured by the finest medical technology and the clinical
compassion of strangers.
Recently, we have been warned that government
“death panels” would knock us off. The provision in the
new health care legislation, which said that private, end-oflife discussions between a patient and his or her physician
would be reimbursable every 5 years, somehow became a
sinister governmental strategy to kill us quickly and save
resources. It disappeared from the President’s health care
legislation, was quietly added back as a Medicare provision,
but disappeared again when the new Medicare guidelines
came out. Can this sensible, thoughtful proposal really be
so objectionable?
“I want to take him home.”
I am so grateful to this man’s brave wife, who knew
exactly what her husband would have wanted. She didn’t
need me to tell her what kind of man her husband was, to
discuss with her the meaning of life or the nuances of
medical futility. What she needed was someone to help her
see what was about to happen in the world of medicine—a
world that was foreign to her but one in which I travel
every day. These conversations are difficult for me. They
are so much harder than explaining the rationale for an
operation, the side effects, or the risks; I don’t feel that I
am very good at them. But every one of my patients is
going to die one day. Like it or not, I should have these
conversations earlier, more often, and more comfortably. If
that makes me part of a death panel, well, I suppose I can
live with that.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C015
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: Daily Dilemmas

As a primary care physician, sometimes the smallest requests can create the biggest challenges.
Between patients, I peeked at my electronic inbox.
Among the usual prescription refills, there was a request for
a callback from Mrs. Talbot, a spry elderly patient of mine
with well-controlled high blood pressure, osteoarthritis,
and a remote history of cancer. She was an active participant at the local senior center, had lunch regularly with
friends on her fixed income, and loved to talk about her
grandchildren. Speaking with her would probably brighten
my day.
“Every year, I receive a subsidy from the state to help
cover the costs of my apartment,” she told me when I
reached her. “Yesterday around the usual deadline, I went
to the office, and they told me that I was too late, that the
deadline had been last week.”
“That’s terrible, Mrs. Talbot,” I replied. “But why are
you calling me?”
“They told me that if I got a note from my doctor,
they could accept my application late.”
“Did they want information about your medical conditions? Did they want to know if you were sick?” I asked.
She was actually one of my healthiest patients.
“No,” Mrs. Talbot said. “They told me that the note
just needs to say that I am under the care of a doctor.”
I paused. She wasn’t asking me to lie and say that she
was sick, but the state office had put her in a difficult
position. If she could provide a note from a doctor— even
if it provided only the most rudimentary information—she
would be able to imply that there was a medical reason for
her tardiness.
At this point, I was really angry. A glitch between my
patient and a government bureaucrat created a problem
that was now sitting in my lap. A deadline had been
missed, and I was being asked to inappropriately use my
medical authority for a quick fix. It was an abuse of the
physician’s social power and a waste of my time.
In general, this power has appropriate and necessary
relevance. Sick people are exempt from certain responsibilities that healthy people must uphold. They can miss work
to rest and get well. If disabled, they cannot work, and the
government and society support their needs financially.
Our letters help obtain discounts for disrupted air travel
due to illness. A physician, through his or her clinical assessment, stands at the cusp between deciding whether a
person is healthy or too ill to pay. But these powerful
conclusions can sometimes be very difficult to make. Although I can determine if a patient has real neurologic
compromise, how can I really know if the low back pain is
severe enough for the patient to stay home, not work, and
not contribute to society’s pot?
My first encounter with this issue came just after I
finished residency. My nephew called requesting a favor. A
senior in high school, he was planning for “Senior Ditch
Day.” The principal had told the students that if they
missed school, they would be suspended with a serious
mark on their permanent records— unless they had a doctor’s note, of course. I weighed the issues; I wanted to
nurse my image of the “cool” aunt by providing the note
for my adolescent nephew, but I realized that doing so
undermined the authority of the physician and abused the
social power that our profession strives so hard to earn.
When I told him I could not write his note, he understood.
I felt guilty but knew that it was just one of those impossibleto-fulfill requests that I would get used to as I grew as a
physician.
As a primary care physician, I frequently get requests
from my patients that challenge the proper use of my authority. They ask for completion of forms for the utility
company that asks me to document a medical reason to
protect them from having their electricity shut off. Each
request has to be weighed carefully. There are some cases in
which all physicians would agree merit intervention. On
the other hand, some patients really have no medical reason to involve us. Many cases lie somewhere in between.
At the start of the summer, some patients get behind
in payments but still want to use their air conditioning.
When I have an elderly patient with chronic obstructive
lung disease, this is a pretty easy decision. Lack of access to
air conditioning during the dog days of summer could lead
to a life-threatening pulmonary exacerbation. Similarly, a
patient with type 1 diabetes mellitus who uses certain types
of insulin needs access to proper refrigeration to prevent a
life-threatening metabolic emergency.
But how do I handle a request from a patient with
obstructive sleep apnea who uses a breathing machine to
help provide appropriate oxygenation at night? This patient has probably lived with the condition for a long time
before diagnosis without hospital visits for emergencies.
However, when a person has this condition and does not
receive appropriate treatment, the risk for hypertension—
and therefore heart attacks and strokes—increases. What is
the true definition of “life-threatening”? Immediate threat
of death? Something that will worsen health over time and
may eventually include grave consequences?
Some requests push the boundary of appropriateness. I
once had a request from a patient in his 40s who took pills
for hypertension— his only medical problem. As much as I
believed he should have access to electricity, he did not
have an appropriate medical justification that would have
allowed me to complete the form and maintain my integrity. I politely explained that this was not the kind of situation that fit the utility company’s definition of “life-threatening.”
On the phone with Mrs. Talbot, I tried to keep the
aggravation from my voice. The problem was a miscommunication or change in schedule between Mrs. Talbot
and the housing authority. It had nothing to do with her
health and certainly nothing to do with me. I explained to
her cautiously that I thought this request was not an appropriate use of physician authority and that I felt badly
that the state put her in such a predicament.
“But if you don’t write this letter, I will need to pay
$400 more a month!” she pleaded.
This felt so unfair. In addition to whether this request
was an appropriate use of my medical authority, it was also
a question of time and money. There are just so many
other more pressing and more important activities that I
must do to help take care of my patients. I also do not get
paid for taking the time to write such a letter in my current
reimbursement scheme. Some offices now reasonably
charge a fee for completion of such forms. The additional
work requires the physician’s appropriate judgment and
time. However, the patients who request this paperwork
are often those with the least disposable income. So we do
what we can, realizing that we will just have to stay at work
a little later. Or worry about burnout. Or refuse to help.
Or wonder if society can find another way to support the
impoverished and reduce the burden on the medical
system.
As I considered Mrs. Talbot’s call, I told her that I
would call her back with my decision. But I felt that I had
no choice. When my nephew asked for a letter for Senior
Ditch Day, there was no medical justification worthy of his
request, and he could live with the consequences of his
actions. The stakes here felt too high. I wanted more time
to deliberate, but my next patient was waiting for me, my
inbox had more refills waiting, and 2 more patients requested return calls. And I had to get home to make dinner
and help my kids with homework.
Just writing the letter would not only help my patient
but would be faster and easier. I didn’t have to lie; she was
in fact under my care. I wanted to call the housing authority, verify the situation, tell them that all patients (at least
those with appropriate access to our health care system) are
“under the care of a physician” and that they were wasting
my time. I would tell them to be sure to help my patient
because the bureaucrats played with the due date of her
forms. But after near-daily challenges with insurance companies over medication authorization and other requests
for utilities help, I needed to pick my battles carefully. I
have only so much time and energy to advocate for my
patients. This battle would have to wait another day. I
called Mrs. Talbot back and told her the letter would be
mailed to her home.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C016
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: Ethics of the Fathers

“But what is the most effective way to teach our fellows
the ethical conduct of research?”
As if a subliminal alarm clock had just sounded, I
awoke with a start. I was attending a national conference
on research ethics, my interest spurred by my dual role at
the time as chairman of the hospital institutional review
board and director of the pulmonary fellowship training
program. However, when the discussion veered to the
moral and regulatory nuances of competence, equipoise,
and substituted judgment, mental exhaustion gained the
upper hand. Dozing intermittently on the last conference
day, I briefly rallied for this final discussion, yet like many
verbal exchanges among intelligent, impassioned experts,
the debate yielded more questions than answers. The meeting adjourned, and I welcomed the transition from the
chilly conference room to the warm autumn sunshine as I
stepped outside in our nation’s capital.
With several hours before my evening train home and
nowhere special to go, I wandered across the mall and soon
found myself at the entrance to the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. In the 10 years since it had
opened, I had hoped to visit but not yet had the chance.
Without children in tow or a pressing agenda at hand, I
knew the present opportunity would not come again soon.
I stepped inside.
The museum exhibit was arranged chronologically,
carefully cataloging the persecution and destruction of Europe’s unwanted peoples—Jews, homosexuals, Roma, the
mentally infirm. To walk attentively from room to room
was to witness genocide unfold in slow motion; rants transitioning to goosesteps, smashed windows into shattered
lives. Viewing the collection was like watching freeze-frame
video of a seismic eruption. One intuitively understood
that a cataclysmic destruction was at hand but was helpless
to intervene or refrain from watching. The most graphic
images appeared toward the end of the exhibit.
In one of the final rooms was a photographic display at
floor level, surrounded by a 4-foot barrier. As I approached
the low wall, I looked over to see the distorted faces of
camp inmates who were the subjects of brutal experimentation. Concentration camp physicians had exposed prisoners to extremes of water temperature and barometric
pressure to determine human tolerance to the elements
that might be encountered by pilots forced to ditch their
aircraft. I assumed that the barrier was intended to limit
young children from seeing the anguish of the victims.
Silently, I wondered which was the greater concern of the
museum personnel: traumatizing children with images of
physical torture or traumatizing them with the knowledge
that physicians were willing participants in inflicting such
torture.
I learned from the museum that law enforcement personnel visited the exhibits on special tours, to understand
the potential for abuse that accompanies power. In recalling the morning’s unresolved question, I realized that
physician-trainees could benefit from a similar program.
One visit here would probably provide a more lasting lesson on the necessary boundaries of scientific inquiry than a
series of classroom lectures on medical ethics. Of course, it
was hardly practical to bring our fellows to Washington,
DC, to calibrate their moral compass. Perhaps there was
another way.
A few weeks later, I prepared for our Friday morning
conference on chest imaging. The goal of the conference
was to present unknown films with limited clinical information, to teach fellows to form a differential diagnosis
based on the radiographic findings alone. I pulled a specific
set of images and headed to the conference room. As the
session started, I placed a posterior anterior and lateral
chest radiograph on the viewbox.
“What do you see?” I asked.
“A left upper lobe lung nodule,” came the reply. Clearly,
there was a sharply circumscribed opaque shadow—an obvious white oval within the darkened lung field.
“And on the lateral?” I continued. Despite intense
scrutiny, a nodule could not be seen.
“Can we see a CT?” the fellows asked. I provided CT
images of the chest. The “lung nodule” was now visible as
a calcified pleural plaque, not a nodule at all. I highlighted
the intended lesson: A 2-dimensional image does not always accurately portray 3-dimensional reality. Sometimes
one has to look deeper.
Customarily, we moved rapidly through films in this
conference, but instead of showing the next case, I digressed to provide background on the patient of this particular radiograph. As a 17-year-old teenager, this young
man and his father were imprisoned in a Nazi labor camp
during World War II. In the winter of 1944, the teenager
developed pleurisy, fever, anorexia, and weight loss. Unable to work, he was brought to the infirmary. The camp
physician improvised a drainage system for the effusion,
offered the meager services available at the time to assist a
Jewish inmate, and turned his attention to other matters.
Returned to the barracks and expected to work, the young
man stood little chance of surviving the elements.
To even the odds, his father implored a fellow inmate—a
dentist when one’s profession mattered—to pry the father’s
gold crowns from his teeth for use as currency. The dentist
complied, using the crude utensils available in camp, and
the painfully extracted bribe was offered to the barracks
guard. A few grams of gold netted several weeks of barracksrestriction for the teenage son—enough time to regain the
strength needed to endure the rigors of camp life. Even
considering that life in a labor camp had little value, this
was a bargain price, readily paid by the father, to ensure his
son’s survival. Father and son were liberated the following
spring, and the films were obtained years later as part of a
preoperative pulmonary assessment.
We digressed further and discussed the actions of the
camp doctor and their ethical ramifications. Did a physician’s obligations to a prisoner differ from his responsibilities to a noninmate patient when resources were scarce? If
a physician modified a procedure to provide treatment, was
this medical care or experimentation? At a time of medical
privation, was it ethical to render acute treatment but insufficient after-care? And a final, broader question: How
could one ensure that external societal forces would not
corrupt a physician’s moral judgment? This last question
proved the thorniest to answer.
As the discussion continued, a parallel story occupied
my thoughts. About 500 km to the east, at around the
same time, a 14-year-old girl was having a very different
encounter with a very different Nazi physician: selection
day. As she gathered the courage to walk past a review
platform with her fellow inmates, she rotated her torso
laterally so that the inspecting physician would not see the
inflamed and excoriated insect bites and sores on her back.
The subtle feint was skillfully executed, and the doctor
triaged her to the right—to survival. The girl’s mother had
not been so lucky. With an indifferent wave of the hand
that belied the magnitude of the summary judgment, the
camp physician dispatched her to the left when she first
arrived at Auschwitz. Her first day at the camp was her last.
In cancer research, much effort has been expended to
understand the signals and pathways that turn a cell malignant. But how does one explain the physician who has
become malignant? Here were two men, steeped in the
same medical tradition, subject to the same propaganda,
and caught within the same political and military system.
Yet while one retained a measure of human compassion
and personal ethics, the other was bereft of both. The medical profession is not a job; it is not even a calling. It is a
gift we are given, to touch another’s life in awesome and
profound ways. We discard this gift at our own peril. Primum non nocere, our medical forefathers advised. First, do
no harm. Once we cross this boundary, all is lost.
The radiology conference ended. I left with a sensation
reminiscent of that autumn afternoon in Washington,
warmed not by a gentle breeze but from the knowledge
that a chest x-ray teaching session could provide something
more simply than a lesson in radiology. Of the questions I
had anticipated, one remained unasked: How do you know
so much about the background of this patient?
I had rehearsed my answer. “From stories told to me,
when I reached an age of remembrance and understanding,” I envisioned replying, “of my father’s pleurisy, my
mother’s back, and my grandfather’s gold teeth.”
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C017
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: Chemotherapy in the Rwandan Countryside: Universal Issues
a World Away

It was almost lunchtime. Outside the hospital in Rwanda,
patients’ family members formed a line behind a large,
steaming pot of potatoes, awaiting the distribution of food
to bring to their hospitalized loved ones. The women wore
kitenges, patterned cloths wrapped around their waists that
gently swept the sun-dried dirt as they walked. The men
wore brightly colored shirts, unbuttoned to cope with the
blistering heat. The single-file queue looked like a psychedelic caterpillar looping around the rural hospital’s inpatient ward. Inside the hospital, the scene was less magical.
I stood in a small, secluded private room with my
patient, Egide, a 42-year-old Rwandan farmer. The rest of
the ward was packed, often 2 patients to a bed. Egide was
used to isolation. Not only was he HIV-positive, but he
had a large, strange mass growing from around his anal
area. The mass prevented him from sitting and forced him
to walk hunched over, clutching a wooden stick.
Efforts to help patients in the developing world with
HIV, tuberculosis, and other infectious diseases are wellknown. Egide was able to benefit from the hospital’s antiretroviral program. In the past, he had been compliant
with his HIV medications. However, his wife had died,
and without her encouragement, it had now been 2 years
since he was last seen in the HIV clinic. He now likely
faced the HIV-associated complication of a secondary malignancy, which sent him desperately shuffling back to the
hospital. What could now be done for his cancer?
As a third-year internal medicine resident in Boston, I
assumed that the day-to-day logistics of treating cancer in
the developing world must differ significantly from those
in the United States, but I wondered: Are the larger issues
that cancer patients and their physicians face truly that
unique? As an aspiring oncologist, I traveled to Rwanda as
a volunteer to find out.
Egide’s fly-infested room stunk of feces, and his mass
rendered him incontinent of stool. He had no family campaigning for his care. He had become the proverbial circus
sideshow act, generating curiosity and disgust as to what
lay behind the swinging metal door to his private room.
Caring for Egide would surely illustrate the practical barriers to successful cancer care in Rwanda and the differences in how treatment is delivered. I soon learned, however, how strikingly universal the fundamental issues
related to cancer treatment are around the world, even
reaching into the confines of Egide’s 80-square-foot room
in the Rwandan countryside.
The first challenge in treatment, as for any cancer patient, began with a diagnosis. Most diseases at the Rwandan hospital were diagnosed by physical examination.
Making a cancer diagnosis, however, is more complicated.
The task of acquiring a biopsy of tissue requires years of
specialized training, including experience in endoscopy,
bronchoscopy, and invasive radiology to properly place the
diagnostic needle in the suspected tumor. For the first
time, Egide’s anal mass offered him an advantage. It was
immediately available to the biopsy needle.
A local Rwandan doctor performed Egide’s biopsy, but
who would provide the exacting eye of the pathologist to
scrutinize the tissue through a microscope and put a scientific name to the mass? I discovered that Rwanda had only
5 pathologists, 40 miles away in the capital city of Kigali,
who served the entire Rwandan population of approximately 10 million people. The local Rwandan doctors informed us that it would take months to hear back from the
pathologists in Kigali. Luckily, I was able to arrange for the
biopsy to be transported and analyzed in Boston.
We soon learned that Egide had a type of cancer called
plasmablastic lymphoma, a rare non-Hodgkin lymphoma
associated with HIV. As this was the first time this particular diagnosis was faced by the local medical staff, who was
to determine the plan of care? The local Rwandan doctors
had a breadth of skills: setting broken bones, delivering
babies, and diagnosing internal medicine conditions by
physical examination alone. But they lacked expertise in
cancer care, a condition rarely diagnosed and even more
rarely treated in their patient population.
Omnipresent even in rural East Africa, the Internet
helped provide the solution. We posted Egide’s case on a
Web site run by the Global Health Delivery Project (www
.ghdonline.org), on which local providers pose questions to
international experts. It was determined that Egide needed
chemotherapy consisting of at least 6 treatments of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone,
priced at $80 a treatment. Despite his poor prognosis, with
proper care, Egide might be cured.
In a country of limited resources, many considered the
cancer regimen extravagant. Similar to the ongoing U.S.
debates about heroic medical efforts to avoid “pulling the
plug on grandma,” our Rwandan hospital team asked:
Should limited funding be spent on a patient with a poor
prognosis? Would financial support for expensive chemotherapy be better spent on preventive services that could
potentially help more patients?
As an alternative to chemotherapy, we considered a
purely palliative care–based approach. Yet shortly thereafter, a few local doctors informed me that many Rwandans
view palliative care as a symbol of a failed medical
system—one that cannot cure its patients. Palliative care
was viewed as an approach where nothing more aggressive
could be done, not a situation where nothing more aggressive should be done. The Rwandan doctors all had an anecdote to share about a time they had proposed a palliativecare plan for a patient, only to face an angry family demanding that the patient be transported to more developed
medical systems in Uganda or Tanzania. Their stories reminded me that every day, patients from all across New
England travel to Boston for their “one last chance” at
survival. Only after all attempts have failed using aggressive
curative treatment are purely palliative approaches finally
accepted, and even then with great reluctance.
Egide, not surprisingly, wanted the aggressive approach. For Egide and the local doctors in charge of his
care, pure palliation would confirm that the Rwandan
health care system had failed. For Egide, as for many of my
patients in Boston, even a sliver of hope is enough to shut
out the reality of one’s own mortality.
A few weeks later, with the generous support of an
American international health organization, Egide’s chemotherapy arrived. His private room quickly became a
hubbub of commotion with doctors, nurses, and even inquisitive patients checking out the scene. When the chemotherapy started, Egide smiled and clapped ecstatically.
After the last drop of fluorescent red doxorubicin infused
into his veins, Egide expressed disappointment to learn
that he would have to wait 3 weeks for additional
chemotherapy.
Shortly after his treatment began, I returned to Boston
to complete my residency. A few months later, I learned
that Egide died. Despite my attempts to learn what happened, I never got a detailed explanation. I wondered if
the chemotherapy had caused him undue immunosuppression, increasing his susceptibility to a myriad of infections,
or if his cancer had progressed, undeterred by the
chemotherapy.
I cannot help but wonder whether the heroic attempt
made in Egide’s private room was a success or failure. Did
my involvement as a transient American internal medicine
resident inspire advocacy for the abandoned patient and
provide guidance for the needed complex cancer treatment? Or did sympathy for one patient’s plight come at
the expense of helping more patients in need?
The details of caring for Egide in the sweltering Rwandan countryside differed starkly from the patients I managed on the oncology floors in the cold Boston winter. Yet,
as a physician caring for a cancer patient, maintaining hope
in the face of a life-threatening diagnosis, understanding
the hesitancy to embrace palliative care, and addressing the
unavoidable financial conflicts while attempting to do everything possible for a suffering patient—the issues could
not have been more familiar.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C018
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: My Stethoscope

As I dug through the drawers of a forgotten cabinet, I
found my old slide rule. Forty-five years ago, this instrument had been critical to my daily life and dangled
from my belt for at least 2 years. It saw steady, daily use,
and with it, I was able to do complex calculations effortlessly. I immediately tried to use it, and to my chagrin, I
found I could not. Even after searching online for operating instructions, I found it all but impossible.
Directly under this archeological stratum that had preserved the slide rule was my old, broken stethoscope—an
original Leatham chest piece with the aluminum little bell
broken off. As I reverently took the remnant of the instrument out of the drawer, I remembered the process that had
led to choosing this stethoscope over all the others.
Auscultation of the heart was very important for medical students. We admired the residents and attending physician who could hear sounds that were simply not heard
by us, and we rapidly learned which resident was really
interested in auscultation by watching him position a patient when listening to the heart. We also quickly learned
the hierarchy of auscultation: Medical students tended to
use only the diaphragm; senior residents knew how to use
the bell; and cardiology attending physicians listened in
both the left lateral decubitus and leaning-forward
positions.
At first we learned that murmurs we couldn’t hear
were categorized according to 4 grades of intensity by the
experts, but a new 6-grade system attributed to Dr. Sam
Levine became popular. The more secure residents joked
about the grade 1 murmur, saying that only Dr. Levine
and God could hear it—in that order. Endless arguments
ensued on which make of stethoscope was the best. There
were advocates for the Rieger–Bowles stethoscope. Others
with equal fervor extolled the outstanding characteristics of
the Sprague–Rappaport model, and the real experts
claimed the superiority of the massive three-headed Tycos
model. The newly popular Littman stethoscope wasn’t
even considered by any of us because none of the senior
staff used it.
My problem was not merely failing to hear the murmurs but also in lacking to find an approach to cardiac
auscultation. I spent hours reading about murmurs, and
the eureka moment eventually came when I found Dr.
Aubrey Leatham’s article about cardiac murmurs in Lancet.
Suddenly, it came to me—the reason I did not hear some
of the murmurs was that I lacked the correct instrument. I
learned about the Leatham chest piece (as the stethoscope
was called) from one of my tutors, and he told me that I
could order this exceptional instrument from Canada. I
donated a unit of blood twice for $25 each and took the
bold step and ordered the stethoscope.
In a short while, it arrived and was instantly the
subject of much discussion among my classmates. Very
quickly I became a zealous promoter of the “chest
piece,” and I particularly enjoyed showing off the “little
bell” piece that worked well for children. We spent
countless hours taking our patients to the “quiet room,”
where the triple insulation allowed us maximum concentration for the cardiac sounds. Ever so slowly, I
started to hear the murmurs others described, and I
attributed this improvement to the wonderful new instrument in my pocket.
The stethoscope lasted through my housestaff training
and as a young attending physician in general medicine. In
the ICU, I demonstrated to the students and residents the
proper way to listen to the various anticipated murmurs
and extra heart sounds. Over the next 30 years (and two
replacement Leatham chest pieces), I continued my habit
of careful auscultation on rounds while my team stood at
the bedside, shifting their weight from one foot to the
other, urging me to stop expounding on all the sounds
when they already had the echocardiography results in the
chart.
During that time, I had to admit that the lengthy and
careful auscultation seldom led to new findings. Rheumatic
heart disease was pretty well gone from North America,
and all of the congenital heart lesions had been fixed long
before the patients became adults. There was still aortic
stenosis and the description of the slow-rising pulse with
an anacrotic notch, but by the time the patient arrived on
the floor, there was already an echocardiogram telling us
the gradient across the valve and the valve area. Many of
my colleagues asked me why I jumped through all those
auscultatory hoops when echocardiography was so much
more accurate.
Eventually, I was forced to admit that I really had not
added anything new through auscultating the hearts of our
new admissions. Even third heart sounds failed to excite
the students because the ejection fraction had been documented by an echocardiogram by the time we saw and
evaluated patients with congestive heart failure. The last
time I had made a significant cardiac diagnosis was some
years ago when I saw an intubated and ventilated patient
with hemoptysis in the ICU, and I recognized the straightening of the left heart border with the very large left atrium
on the admission chest radiograph and diagnosed tight mitral stenosis.
Yet, I will not readily abandon the process of auscultation. I still listen to the lungs, even after I have seen the
chest radiograph, and listen to the heart, even knowing the
ejection fraction. Despite recognizing that my auscultation
fails to add to the care of the patient, I persist. Touching
the patient during the physical examination with my
stethoscope helps to establish a connection with the patient, helps to gain their trust, and adds a bit to the often impersonal greetings our patients receive. This impression,
however, is not evidence-based.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C019
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: Doctor and Son

Dad was weak and disoriented. His skin was mottled
and cool. His blood pressure was dangerously low,
and he was not making much urine. Were his doctors and
nurses paying attention? Did they know if he was septic?
Had they left the lines in too long? I was alarmed, but I
stayed on the sideline, concerned and vigilant.
Later that morning, Dad tried to sit forward, pulling
against his restraints. He looked me in the eye and said,
“Let’s get out of here.” I knew that he meant it. I had
visions of us tiptoeing down the hall, catheters trailing
behind as we escaped from the intensive care unit to the
farm. I looked him back in the eye and said gently, “Dad
we are going to get out of here, but this is not the time to
do it.” He settled back. I moved to his side to comfort him,
saying, “I am here with you. You will be all right.” As
quickly as that our roles had reversed—I was now the caretaker and protector. And then the most incredible thing
happened: The roles switched back. This very sick man
looked back at me and said, “Son, I will always be with
you.”
I was a son long before I became a doctor. I should
have known that these two roles would intersect someday,
but I never imagined the challenges of being both a doctor
and a son.
My father had grown up during the Great Depression.
“Down home” was a three-story Victorian house where he
was raised by his extended family. Uncle Ollie was a farmer
and grocer. As a child, Dad worked on Uncle Ollie’s small
farm. He earned his way through law school working at
Ollie’s grocery. Uncle Murrell was a policeman; and the
story from my Dad was that every Christmas season Uncle
Murrell and Uncle Ollie sold Christmas trees on a downtown street corner. When Christmas Eve came, they broke
out a bottle of wine and gave the trees away for nothing.
Dad had watched over his extended family as they
aged and became infirm. He brought them hams and turkeys for the holidays, visited them when they were ill,
buried them when they died, and placed memorial wreaths
on their graves every year. He was the caregiver, and he
watched over me.
An important change occurred the year that I graduated from medical school. Dad bought an old farm, overgrown with trees and bushes. He continued his law practice and pursued his passion for farming on the weekends.
I spent most of my time working as a medicine resident,
but in my time off I helped him clear the land. Finally, we
planted acres of corn and a small garden with cantaloupe,
tomatoes, squash, and more corn.
I completed residency training, married, and moved
across the country to pursue advanced training in critical
care. I made a point of returning to the farm every year and
of attending to my parents. When Dad needed medical
care I found good providers, and I took time to be there
when he was a patient.
But inevitably the crisis arrived. I had returned to the
farm for a visit and while at dinner, Dad had reached for
the nitro. “Dad, tell me about this,” I said. “Oh, just a little
pain, nothing to worry about,” he said. I knew better. I
made him promise that he would call his doctor the next
day. As I drove to the airport the following morning, I
wondered whether I should have stayed, but I had long
before decided to choose a doctor I trusted and let go of
the urge to be my father’s doctor.
The first phone call came later that afternoon. Dad
had unstable angina. He had been admitted to the coronary care unit. The call had been professional, reassuring,
and I turned my attention to the job at hand: seeing patients, writing notes and orders, answering pages. The next
morning, the call was more alarming. His chest pain had
worsened, and he had had a run of ventricular tachycardia.
He was in the cath lab. I struggled—should I fly back
across the country now? Not yet, I decided; and then the
third call came. The catheterization showed severe left
main coronary artery disease, and my 85-year-old father
was undergoing emergency bypass. A bypass was the correct decision; but at 85, the stakes were high. I flew home.
I had to be with Dad as his son, not his doctor.
At his bedside, the setting was all too familiar: the
mechanical ventilator and diodes monitoring various vital
signs. Dad looked like so many of the critically ill patients
whom I had cared for over the past 25 years. But this
wasn’t just another critically ill patient, this was my Dad—
the guy who watched over me, the guy I worked with to
clear the farmland, the guy who let my kids drive the tractor all over the farm. I was relieved when he wrinkled his
brow and acknowledged my presence and hopeful later
that night when he was extubated.
But his condition worsened the next day. When I arrived, the nurse informed me that he had just been reintubated. “For airway protection,” she said. I looked at the
tube in his throat. Was he going to die? What was going
on? Do they care? They don’t care like I do. I saw the
beginning of a long intensive care unit stay with agonies
that he shouldn’t have to endure at the end of a full, vigorous life. Dad had not wanted this. Dad’s son was determined not to let this happen. For the first time, the doctor
in me emerged when a surgeon said that my dad needed a
tracheostomy. A tracheostomy would only bring depression and frustration for my father—prolong things. “Not
now,” I said, and later that day I called Dad’s cardiologist
and told him that we would need to talk before anyone
performed a tracheostomy.
I had crossed a boundary that I had not wanted to
cross. But they would have performed the tracheostomy
had I not intervened. What would my colleagues havedone? What would I have done in the same circumstances?
Should I have intervened?
Dad improved over the next few days. I stayed out of
medical decisions, even though it wasn’t easy—decisions
about weaning patients from mechanical ventilators, extubation, and removal of catheters were routine for me.
“You’re better,” I told him. Finally, they weaned him from
the ventilator and extubated him. He whispered to me that
he could not take much more. “We’ll get back to the
farm,” I said. And we did.
I sat on the porch, looking out over the fields. What
happens in other families when things don’t go well and
there is no doctor in the family, I wondered? Is one better
off being both doctor and son—or worse?
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C020
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: Prognosis

I didn’t expect the telephone conversation to take such a
turn. I was returning a call to report the results of tumor
markers that were still pending at the time of my patient’s
clinic visit. I told her the results, and along with them
came implications I knew she wouldn’t want to hear. The
tumor marker values, instead of declining in a manner
consistent with a good response to treatment, were increasing. I sensed the tension in her voice as she asked, “That’s
not good, is it?”
I told her that we’d need to see what the overall trend of
the numbers was before we could say for certain that the
disease was not responding to treatment. I told her that the
magnitude of the increase was relatively slight and explained
that the imaging studies—CT and nuclear bone scans—
would give us far more information. I stated that her sense of
well-being was far more important than numbers. Then I
admitted that we indeed would have liked to have seen the
numbers decline rather than increase.
Her next question caught me by surprise. “How much
longer do I have?”
My mind raced as I searched for an answer. The gulf
between us seemed to widen. I couldn’t see her. She
couldn’t see me. Statistics rushed through my mind, but
they were of little help.
Her words then pierced the dense silence, “I just want
to be able to plan. A year? Five years? Because if it’s just a
few months, I want to quit work and spend time with my
family.”
I looked at my pen. I ran my hand along the smooth,
cold surface of my desk.
“Doctors are often wrong when asked to make estimates
like this,” I responded. “I could give you the statistics, but
these are just numbers, and you are a unique individual.”
“I just want to know if I should quit my job,” she half
whispered.
How much longer do I have? Her question was simple
enough. The request was reasonable. I could give her an
estimate. How useful is that?
I looked out the window past the trees. The yawning
cerulean arc of sky above was vast. The problem and the
beauty of how this life is arranged is that there are certain
things we are not meant to know with precision. Certainly,
the question of prognosis gets easier to answer when the
end is very near. But even then, we often get it wrong.
I think one of the kindest gifts we are given in this life
is that we are allowed to trudge forward in complete ignorance of that which is so uniquely ours—mortality. When
and how we die is a process that unfolds in pure mystery.
When we glean some insight aided by a diagnosis or a
prognosis, the passage of days becomes painfully selfconscious. I ache with this knowledge, these collections of
median survivals that bear only a vague resemblance to
truth. To think that so many upturned faces, so many
searching eyes await a response from us that we can hardly
provide. Prognostication carries such weight and yet in
many ways is not unlike divining the weather. Despite the
sophisticated instruments, error in forecasting is tolerated,
accepted, forgiven.
I finally responded. “I really don’t know. I think I’ll
have a better sense of how things are going after the next
set of scans. This is really hard to talk about with you so far
away. I can’t see you or hold your hand.”
“I know,” she said.
Now I could hear the strain of tears penetrating her
voice. “It wasn’t really a fair question.”
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C021
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: Who Lives, Who Dies

For centuries, soldiers and physicians have pondered the
apparent random nature of life and death in battle.
Does fate alone dictate who lives and who dies? Step to the
left, and you survive the mortar strike. Switch convoy vehicles, and the IED devours your friend instead of you. Are
such events predetermined? Or do our choices decide these
outcomes?
Across several combat deployments that followed the
events of September 11th, every time I went to work I
knew with reasonable certainty that someone would not
come home. And not just “someone,” but a patient who
was also a colleague or a friend. In my career, I’ve been
present at the point of wounding, on the medical evacuation flight, in the aid station, and at the memorial service—a
complete arc of care that made each experience of death
and dying more rich and more raw. I also often bore some
responsibility for every medical outcome in advance.
Someone I knew might live, or not, because my duties as a
trainer, logistician, planner, leader, or clinician were fulfilled, or not. I wondered whether I could successfully ensure a level of care as close as possible to prevailing peacetime standards and follow the principles of best medical
practice in a tactically challenging and unforgiving out-ofhospital environment. Would life and death become more
or less random based on my decisions and my efforts?
Although at times I was on the ground delivering care,
other times I sat in a climate-controlled plywood room
with a cup of coffee and made decisions remotely. Would
this or that person be evacuated now, later, or not at all? I
tried to be cool to both the emotional impact and the
personal urgency of each caller. I asserted real and imagined authority to remove the decision-making responsibility from the shoulders of young medics. My conscience
was a better place for these decisions to rest. I based my
decisions on many clinical and nonclinical factors—the
availability or nonavailability of limited medical evacuation
assets; operational challenges, such as altitude, terrain, distance, weather, security; and sometimes competing political and military interests.
My physical detachment was both easy and hard.
Like every paramedic on the street or surgeon in the
operating room, I made clinical decisions with incomplete data. Deciding from afar, via radio, telephone, or
instant message, it was easy to appear cool and emotionally detached even when I wasn’t. But this same protective distance accentuated the second-guessing that naturally followed each event. My decisions often had
permanent consequences. And having been on the other
end of the call in the past, I felt sure that I knew what
the men out there thought of me when I responded
“no,” “not now,” or “no, not ever.”
In the end, nearly every American who entered our
medical system alive remained that way. Not so for the
Afghans. In a parallel world that collided with mine daily,
my Afghan neighbors lived in a nation ravaged by more
than three decades of war, blighted by collapsed political, human, and economic structures. Carefully crafted,
if not perfectly applied, medical rules of engagement,
safety concerns, and limited medical evacuation platforms and hospital beds conspired to keep most Afghans
out of the U.S. health care system (although a visit to
any American medical facility would reveal that most
patients were still Afghan civilians). At the same time,
an appropriate desire to foster self-sufficiency as part of
an overall health sector development plan and a bigpicture national exit strategy further influenced clinical
decision making.
Although we conducted training and development
projects to improve the skills, equipment, supplies, manning, and overall capabilities of local Afghan civilian and
military medical facilities, they did not provide any immediate benefit to individual patients on a given day. Many
days I denied care to Afghan patients. Other days I treated
the enemy while denying care to the innocent. And on
occasion I tended to patients with little to no chance of
survival. They would not disrupt the flow of other casualties; they might serve as useful training for my Afghan
medical counterparts and my medics; and I could at least
ease their suffering while I watched them die. But I routed
Afghans to their local medical facilities as much as possible,
often with the knowledge that they would receive substandard care or no care at all. How best to reconcile my
Hippocratic oath with a system that necessarily operated in
terms of “us” and “them,” Afghan and American, military
and civilian? Treat everyone and burden—and potentially
break—a resource-limited medical system. Treat no one
and abrogate professional responsibilities. Were some lives
worth more than others? It was a delicate balance between
doing good and doing no harm.
Were my decisions right? Were they wrong? How
much power did I truly have over life and death in my
wars? Did I make wrong decisions for the right reasons and
right decisions for the wrong ones? Would I have done the
same in peacetime? Would I do the same again?
Having left military service, I often think back on
these experiences. Questions of destiny, fate, life, and death
still confound, trouble, and humble me. I remember the
names and faces of friends, colleagues, strangers, and enemies, dead and alive. I remember good experiences, and I
remember bad ones. I remember small and large successes
and failures alike. I still practice medicine—although on
many days the work seems very unfamiliar to me. In my
mind, I return to faraway places several times each day. But
except for the occasional amusing anecdote, I rarely share
the details of my “former life.” Would anyone understand?
Would they be shocked or offended? Would they judge mefor the decisions I’ve made? Worse yet, would they not care
at all?
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C022
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: Images of Healing

One Sunday morning, I had just completed ward
rounds. I heard a page overhead that chapel services
would begin in less than 5 minutes. My to-do list was
short, so I decided to attend. The chapel at Brooke Army
Medical Center is simple, with 10 rows of chairs fanning
out on either side and a row along the back wall. When I
arrived, the congregation was singing the opening hymn to
organ music, and the chaplain was at the altar. Because
there were no open seats, I stood by the back entrance. My
thoughts were still focused on medical problems and many
unanswered questions. As the prayer service began, I
looked up toward the altar. Until then, I had not noticed
the three young men in wheelchairs along the center aisle.
Our medical center is a busy place, providing routine and
trauma care for active duty and retired military and their dependents. Brooke has been supporting the wounded through
all of our great wars. During the Vietnam War, our hospital
became famous for its burn treatment center and more recently had become an amputee center of excellence for troops
coming home from Afghanistan and Iraq. Every day I saw
disfigured warriors with severe burns wrapped in neoprene
masks and bandages and others with well-healed stumps after
amputation. Some wounded warriors motor around in stateof-the-art wheelchairs; others rehab on prosthetic legs or circular frame external fixators. These images had become a large
part of my hospital culture.
These images often brought me back to middle school in
Philadelphia. I had often seen many men in uniform riding in
wheelchairs or walking with crutches at shopping centers, on
the train, and even in Valley Forge Park. Our black-and-white
TV sets highlighted the Vietnam War every night at dinner,
showing gunfire from helicopters or body bags or antiwar
protesters. The war on television had been going on since I
was in the second grade. My friends and I played all kinds of
combat scenarios in the neighborhood that imitated the shows
“Combat” and “The Gallant Men.”
Vietnam was a place far from where we lived. None of
my friends knew much about the war. But seeing these
college-aged soldiers without limbs made me feel so uneasy
that I could not look at the amputees for very long. My games
of playing soldier became a frightening reality of war when
seeing these men. But these soldiers had lost more than a
limb. Those boyhood images never left my subconscious.
My personal intentions for attending chapel services
that morning were rooted in a dedicated time for spiritual
reflection; however, I became emotionally focused on the
three wounded warriors. I assessed their disabilities from
the back of the chapel. The wheelchair-bound Hispanic
soldier closest to me was an average-sized guy in his early
20s. He was reciting prayers with his friends. Although he
appeared normal, it was obvious that his legs were
paralyzed.
The second wounded warrior had an above-knee right
leg amputation. He was staring straight ahead with his left
foot rhythmically rocking his infant son asleep in a car seat.
This 30-something–year-old father had well-healed burns
of the scalp, ears, and face, with extensive white-pink scarring melted like wax around his bony, bald cranium. To
his immediate left, his wife smiled as she held their 3-yearold daughter and proudly wore a bold red lanyard around
her neck emblazoned with the letters “U.S.M.C.”
The chaplain then asked the congregation if they had
any special prayer requests. By this time, my thoughts were
consumed with empathy for these disabled warriors. The
third soldier sitting near the left front row raised his hand.
He called out the names of his two buddies who had died
in combat when he was injured and asked us to pray for
them and their families.
The third wounded warrior, in his late 20s, was built
like a linebacker with broad shoulders. He sat at attention.
A deltoid sported a tattoo depicting a waving U.S. flag. His
left leg was elevated in a long leg cast with a 101st Airborne
baseball cap resting on top of his forefoot. His right leg was
amputated below the knee. He looked content. His mother
sat next to her son, and his father quietly wept throughout
the entire chapel service.
These soldiers in the chapel unlocked the disturbing
memories of Philadelphia long ago. Their physical wounds
were healing, but life as they knew it would never be the
same. Their lives had been redefined by life-altering injuries. What had they witnessed in the theater of war? Could
they ever reconcile their wounds, pain, fears, and nightmares? Would they ever feel whole again?
My thoughts were interrupted as the congregation began
to pray. The chaplain asked us to exchange a sign of peace
with a handshake or an expression of love with a family member. At that moment, the three young men wheeled directly
toward me to shake my hand. The macho linebacker soldier
gave me a firm handshake and said, “Thanks, Doc, for taking
care of soldiers.” I sat down overwhelmed. I had never felt so
vulnerable. I couldn’t do more than sit there and cry.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C023
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: A Matter of the Heart

 followed my attending physician down the hall. Our
shoes clicked sharply against the white tile. The space
ahead opened into a crosswalk bridging the hospital towers
over the street below. Light streamed in through the large
glass panels, painting the ground yellow. White coats littered the corridor, and I glanced beyond them at the cars
passing underneath. They felt distant and small.
Inside the room, Mr. Lucas sat on the bed folding his
brother’s clothes. Several suitcases lay open in the corner.
Behind him, the curtains glowed red, pulled tight to keep
out the fading sun. Pink balloons floated limply above the
bed. A bouquet lay on the desk to his right. Mr. Lucas
wasn’t my patient, but I knew him well. When his older
brother had first come to the clinic with progressive chest
pain, Mr. Lucas accompanied him and brought his papers
in a large folder. When he’d returned for preop screening,
Mr. Lucas took notes and double-checked his brother’s
medications. On the day of the operation, it was Mr. Lucas
who camped out in the waiting room with blankets and a
pile of books, ready for the surgeon’s periodic updates. It
was Mr. Lucas who had told me about my patient’s plans
for the future. It was Mr. Lucas who was there in the days
following the procedure, hunched over the bed until the
end of visitation hours, watching his brother’s tubes rise
and fall. And it was Mr. Lucas who was here now—48 years
old, with thinning gray hair and tired eyes—gathering his
brother’s things on his scheduled discharge day, hours after
he’d died.
My attending physician told Mr. Lucas how his
brother had collapsed while walking the floor, how there’d
been alarms, crash carts, and people yelling for paddles as
the monitor stopped dancing, and how they wouldn’t
know anything more definitive until after the autopsy. Mr.
Lucas sat on the bed quietly, his hands folded in his lap,
eyes searching the ground for something I couldn’t see.
That morning, there had been life and an expectation of
more. But that was gone now, and only words remained,
like thin shells left by a receding tide. The room was quiet.
There were no deep, heaving sobs, no quivering shoulders
or staccato cries. We stayed in the silence carefully, like
three people standing over dying embers after a senseless
fire, unsure of the moment and afraid.
I spent the rest of the afternoon in the crosswalk
watching the street move. The sun was setting, cutting
sharp purple streaks into the sky. Staring down past the
glass, I thought about what Mr. Lucas had taught me, that
medicine’s “routine” tests and procedures are never routine
for my patients or their families, who carry measures of
anxiety and hope into each encounter; that loved ones often need as much attention and care as the patients do.
Standing there, I sensed that there would be more like Mr.
Lucas and his brother, people whose stories would push me
beyond the safety of clinical knowledge and technical skill
into the space between medicine’s great successes and vast
limitations. The possibility felt like the edge of a profoundly powerful secret. My patients would never just
be diabetics, cancer patients, or asthmatics—they’d be
spouses, parents, siblings, and friends. Those were the roles
that mattered, the ones they had played before becoming
my patients and the ones that would last long after.
The realization seemed so obvious that part of me wanted
to laugh. But it was also deeply convicting. As a doctor, I
would have the medications and technology, the procedural
skill and expert opinion. I would have, for all practical purposes, much of the power. But my patients and their families
were the ones who would always have the meaningful stories
and goals—the linchpins holding the most challenging, frustrating, and fulfilling moments of my work in balance. The
mother worried sick about her child’s ear infection. The son
unsure of how to choose death for the critically ill woman
who’d given him life. The drug-seeker and the malingerer.
The businessman concerned about a neck growth; the injured
athlete who fears his career is over. The woman facing surgery
for her genetic predisposition to breast cancer. The concerned
families and friends. And the man who collapses on the floor
after crucial, life-prolonging surgery, leaving behind a brother
who loved him quietly but fiercely. In them, I would find
what mattered.
Standing there with the sun against my back, I understood, deeply, for the first time since I donned my white
coat and swore that sacred oath as a hopeful, wide-eyed,
first-year medical student that the practice of medicine
needed to be about more than correct diagnoses and management. At best, it needed to be a long lesson in how to
journey with people through crisis and into the joy and
grief waiting beyond it. It needed to exercise my heart and
not just my brain. It also needed a vision large enough to
cover seasons of success and error and modest enough to
find its own limitations between certainty and doubt. And
perhaps above all, it needed to inspire my own evolving
story, to carry me across its long arc and change me, so that
as I tried to affirm the highest values in my patients’ lives,
they would also affirm mine. The thought filled me at once
with hope, fear, and an abiding sense of humility. I exhaled
and felt a breath fall through my chest.
Below, the light flashed red, and the cars slowed to a
stop. Their shapes seemed closer now, blurred softly
against the fading light.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C024
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: House Call

I first met Marie several years ago. She was already into
her 80s and had chronic lung disease. Her daughter, with
whom she lived, hoped I could restore her strength and
help with episodes of worsening cough, phlegm production, and shortness of breath. My evaluation confirmed
bronchiectasis, and together we assembled a plan for successfully managing flares with regular bronchodilator therapy and intermittent antibiotics.
A few years after I met Marie, her grandson was getting married in the South and we worked to get her ready
for the trip. We arranged for oxygen and prepared contingency plans—she did great. In the office a few months
later, I saw the beautiful pictures and enjoyed a light moment with a proud grandmother and mother.
Unfortunately, Marie declined this year. Despite home
oxygen, her health began to fail. She told her daughter that
she did not want to be hospitalized. I asked for an office
visit to be sure we had exhausted all avenues of restoring
some strength. Now with limited mobility and breathlessness, Marie relied on her son-in-law to transport her to my
office in Center City Philadelphia. Noting no other options, I resorted to a trial of corticosteroids. Two weeks
later, I checked in and learned that there had been no
response. We arranged for home care, and when she became bed-bound and began having delusions, we asked
hospice to see her. A few weeks later, her daughter informed me that she had taken a turn for the worse. On a
Thursday night, a few days after that phone message, I
made a house call.
Marie’s home in South Philadelphia was what is
known as a “straight-through” row home—living room,
dining room, kitchen, all in a line. I entered and greeted
Marie’s daughter, son-in-law, and her grandson and his
wife. We exchanged small talk. I then ascended the stairs.
Marie was sleeping in the back bedroom. The surroundings were immaculate. On the bedside table and dresser
were pictures of her family totaling five generations. Beside
her was a glass of ice water. She was propped on a pillow
and covered by a perfectly spread comforter. The sheets
were crisp and white. Marie was comatose but perfectly
cared for, her skin free of breakdown. She was turned
slightly to the left side, soon to be turned back, as the
hospice nurses had carefully instructed her daughter. I sat
in a chair and took Marie’s hand. It was cold and dusky.
Her chest revealed course rhonchi, but not an uncomfortable or audible rattle. The atropine drops had helped. Her
cardiac tones were strong, but the pulses were faint and the
pattern of respiration was clearly irregular.
On the bureau was a simple ringed notebook—the
kind I used in high school biology class—summarizing
Marie’s care. In its pages, I reviewed entries detailing every
medication dose, periodic vital signs, observations of the
hospice nurses on their visits, and notes entered by her
daughter. It was an informal medical record, yes, but one
recorded with great detail, care, and devotion.
After reviewing her treatment program and the schedule of medications and care, I returned downstairs and sat
with her daughter. The wall in the kitchen was adorned
with pictures and artifacts from the local firehouse where
Marie’s son-in-law had worked. I enjoyed a glass of water,
and we talked. I learned more about the family as we discussed what would lie ahead for Marie in the coming days.
We reviewed who and when to call and how I would sign
the death certificate. I relaxed and enjoyed the moment
just to sit with Marie’s family. I don’t remember whether I
stayed 10 minutes or 40 minutes, but the visit was entirely
comfortable. I gathered my things and prepared to leave.
Leaving the home, I entered the streets of South Philadelphia. It was then that I noticed my eyes were wet. They
were not tears of sadness, though I was saddened to see
Marie in the process of dying. They were not tears of
emotion, though it was an emotional situation. They were
tears of respect—respect for this patient, respect for this
daughter, respect for this family, and for the profound
sense of privilege to be Marie’s physician.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C025
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: On Not Being Her Doctor

She looked made of bones and paper. Years of smoking
had left her lungs mottled and now cancerous. Even a
few sentences left her breathing like an angry fledging lost
from its nest.
She was not like this when we first met, years ago. She
was healthy and intelligent and had a smoker's cough that
was not strong enough to help her quit smoking. Even
then in the beginning, i when the future was theoretical, she
asked that when the time came, when her time came,
would I help her? This request was always accompanied
with an intent look. ¡
I always assured her that I would. Yes, I would help
her. Of course I would. Hospice has been a balm to my
patients, and to me, as their time came and they suffered.
I believe patients! stories heal, and reveal, both the
patient and their physician. We physicians have those patients with whom we connect. The connection might arise
from a common inteijest like poetry or a sports team, a
similar or dissimilar culture, or a shared struggle over a
difficult medical illness. With this patient, our connection
was filled with humor, the clashes of our two strong wills,
and her struggles with the demons of her sharp life. It
infuriated her that I was always late. As I always do when I
fall far behind, I would bring in a chocolate for her and for
me. Apologetic chocolates, I call them.
I watched her inexorable decline over months and
months. Clothes began to cling more to her frame. Her
head no longer easily tiirned because of pain and vertebral
collapse. She retained her keen sense of humor, but a certain irritability came tJD rasp between her and the world.
Increasingly, her world was limited by disease; her worst
torment was boredom.j Medications, subspecialists, love of
family, cigarettes—these kept her going, but the dismantling of her self continued.
I enrolled her in hospice, seeking the relief that it
could provide. She suffered the visits of the hospice nurse
variably. Opiates were ineffective and made her drowsy.
Benzodiazepines relieved her dyspnea, but she became delirious. Her intellect was her greatest treasure, giving her
access to the world oft art, music, politics, and literature.
Weighing the effect on| her consciousness, she refused further medication.
Her friends called, worried about and frustrated with
her lack of comfort and frustrated with her. "She says she's
ready to die," they told me. I understood. I expressed my
sympathy and echoed their distress that she was having
such difficulty. After reviewing her past medications with
the hospice team, I hoped to convince her to restart the
opiates. I felt that she would agree once I assured her that
we could get her comfjjrt and ease, rest for her agitation.
For myself, I thought jof the well-established principle of
double effect, which holds: If the intent of a treatment is to
O N BEING A DOCTOR
keep a patient comfortable, then it is ethically allowable
that death be hastened in the process.
But my patient refused this process. She said that she
was ready to die. She did not want to spend her last days in
a delirious haze. She did not want the cognitive curtain to
fall before she herself had left the stage.
I had not understood, or had willed myself not to
understand, that with her intent look my patient had
meant that, when the time came, she wanted me to provide
her with the means to end her life on her terms.
I support the Washington Earth with Dignity Act,
but I had not anticipated that I would enact such a death
and not in a patient whom I had come to love. When I
became a doctor, I didn't think that I was going to be
doing this. But I didn't want anyone else to do it. I was her
doctor. I would be her doctor carrying out her most profound wish, one that was her right, granted to her by a vote
of her fellow citizens.
But I had no idea what this Death with Dignity entailed. I wasn't sure how to start, and my ambivalence
halted even an initial attempt to get started. My patient's
friends called me several times at her behest, but I remained immobile. Resourceful, her friends explained the
process to me, set the appointment for the required second
opinion, and made sure that I had received word of the
consulting doctor's concurrence.
As the process then wended its way on the prosaic path
of forms, confirmations, waiting periods, repeated confirmations of intent, and documentation that she was not
depressed, I visited with my patient several times. She
would look at me with sunken eyes tight with pain, her
breathing so shallow, words barely a whisper, shake her
head when I offered the pain medication. We touched on
existential beliefs, and she reassured me that she was at
peace with her decision. She didn't think that there was life
after death and so—she'd nod again, say again—she was
ready.
At home, I cried and thought how difficult it is to let
one singular light go out. I pondered the nature of death
and that this person was the only one like her on the
planet. I thought of our relationship and all that she had
given me, all that we had shared. And then I wrote the
prescription for the secobarbital that she had requested: 37
capsules to be opened, the powder stirred into the choking
bitter slurry that she would have to work hard to swallow
and to keep down as her last act in life.
I went to see my patient one last time. She looked
suspended in time: in bed, reduced, waiting, a book open
at her side. I sat on her bed, talking with her quietly,
leaning in. I felt tears rising up into my eyes. She thanked
me for coming. Again, as per protocol, and perhaps for me,
she repeated that she wanted to proceed with ending her
life. Then, as I held her hand, her friend came into the
room and said, "Jeri is on the phone. You asked me to call
her?" My patient closed her eyes and nodded, and the
friend reached the telephone between my patient and me.
My patient separated her hand from mine and took the
telephone. I straightened up, taken aback. I realized that
the well-meaning friend had broken the plane of contact
between my patient and me. In 15 years in clinic, I can't
recall a time that someone has breached that sacred space
without asking me first. And my patient had taken the
telephone. But what did I expect? Did I expect she would
say, "Can I call her back? I'm with my doctor"?
And then I noted how her hoarse voice took new en-
• ergy as she began to speak to the person on the other end
of the line. As for me, she looked up vaguely and waved me
goodbye or away and went back to her call. I stood. I
turned to her friend, who thanked me with a gentle, final
smile. I stood there for another moment, or two, or three.
And then with nothing to do, I walked out of the room,
down the stairs, and out onto the front porch into the
bleached morning sun. I felt bereft, at a loss, disoriented.
I realized, suddenly, that I was hot her doctor anymore. As doctors, we say that we "lose" a patient. But
that's an illusion. When our patients die, we lose a part of
ourselves. That loss often happens incrementally: the diagnosis, the variable decline, more symptoms, less independence, fewer visits, then fewer telephone calls, then a final
notice and perhaps a goodbye, and then we sign the death
certificate and our role as their physician is over.
In my patient's choice of Death with Dignity, she was
choosing to depart the medical realm. And she was choosing to leave me—a part of that realm—as well. As I stood
there on the porch in the early morning sun, the full impact ofthat truth came upon me. I realized, suddenly, that
I was not her doctor anymore in a way more specific and
acute than I have experienced before.
In a strange and painful way, I had facilitated the loss;
it had been by my pen and writing on the white prescription paper that had given her the means. But that piece of
paper was just a thin last action in a much greater transition. My patient had wrested control away from me and
from the medical system. As was her right. I felt a pang of
regret, almost embarrassment, at my resistance to recognize
her truth and at my overstaying, metaphorically, at her
deathbed. Her path was her choice, her place with her
friends and whatever space and time or bare earth might
await her.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C026
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: Black and White

Mrs. Connor was a 51-year-old woman with stage IV
colon cancer who was referred to our clinical trials
unit after receiving extensive salvage chemotherapy. She
was hospitalized for hyperbilirubinemia and possible biliary
decompression in preparation for trial enrollment. Within
seconds of meeting her, I knew that she would not be a
candidate for experimental therapy.
She was severely cachectic and debilitated, barely able
to sit up in bed. Her belly was tensely swollen. An abdominal CT scan revealed extensive ascites and hepatic metastases nearly replacing the liver. I knew that I was about to
embark on the heart-wrenching task of discussing goals of
care with a woman approaching the end of her life.
I introduced myself and asked Mrs. Connor what she
understood about her illness. She accurately outlined her
medical history. I then asked about her goals. “I want to be
cured, but I guess that isn’t possible,” she said. When I
asked her what else was important to her, she spoke about
abdominal and leg swelling, mobility, breathing: practical
quality-of-life issues. She continued, “My family. I love my
family, and I want to spend as much time with them as
possible. I have four kids and five grandkids. My 35-year old son, Sam, is my oldest.”
I asked whether she would like me to meet with her
and her family together. She said that she did but that Sam
was the only family that she needed then. She called Sam
on her cell phone and handed it to me. I introduced myself
and asked Sam whether he was planning to visit the hospital today. If so, I would be happy to discuss her condition with him.
When he suggested talking by phone, I concluded that
he must not understand the gravity and sensitivity of the
topics that I wanted to discuss. Nonetheless, Sam was
clearly the key figure in his mother’s life, and I did not
know how accessible he would be after I hung up the
phone. I therefore seized the opportunity and stated, “I
want to discuss options for her care.”
“Are you going to put in the drain to take care of
jaundice?”
“No, I don’t think that will help.”
“Then what do you suggest?”
We were finally getting to the crux of the issue, but I
felt uncomfortable breaking such profoundly bad news
over the phone in the presence of Mrs. Connor, who had
not yet heard the news herself.
“I haven’t spoken to your mother about this yet, so we
can speak when you get here.”
“Go ahead and tell me now.”
He had taken charge.
“Okay. I am sorry to say that I think we need to stop
treating her cancer and focus entirely on her quality of
life.”
“Well, I have business to take care of today. I can meet
you there this afternoon.”
Sam was all business. When I met him later that day,
I extended my hand and he shook mine firmly in a businesslike manner.
“Your mother was singing your praises,” I began.
“I’m her right hand.”
“You carry a heavy load.”
“It’s no big deal. I’m used to it.”
I turned to address Mrs. Connor, “Sam obviously
loves you a great deal.”
He broke in, “I buy her flowers every week.”
“I saw a picture of your kids on your mom’s phone.
You have a beautiful family.”
“I worry about the little one. He’s sensitive.”
“How old is he?”
“Twelve.”
“Have you spoken to him about your mother’s
condition?”
“Yes, in a way.”
“Has he asked about or mentioned death or heaven?”
“No.”
“We can discuss ways to help you speak with him.”
“No need. It’s all part of life. He’ll be all right. He’ll
have to deal with it, just like I always have. I saw my cousin
die of multiple sclerosis, so I know what it’s all about.
That’s life. For me, everything is black and white.”
For a moment, I thought that he was referring to how
difficult life was growing up as an African American.
“I had to grow up fast, take care of my family, and run
my own businesses. I don’t worry about shades of gray.”
I then realized that “black and white” meant taking a
stand, never doubting, taking care of business. Sam had the
drive to survive, a siege mentality. I then asked his understanding of his mother’s illness. Like his mother, he tooaccurately described her medical history. He ended by asking about the biliary stent.
“I am afraid that placing the drain will do no good.
There are so many tumors in the liver that draining one
area will not help,” I responded.
“Then what do you propose?”
“I think that we should focus entirely on her comfort,
her quality of life. I wish that we had better treatments.”
He understood. We discussed practical aspects of optimizing her quality of life. I then stood to leave the room.
When I did, Sam also stood and said, “Mom, I’m going to
step out for a minute to get a drink of water.”
Once out of earshot, Sam got down to business. He
spoke about the details of his mother’s impending death.
He explained how, at age 12, he assumed the responsibility
of attending to his older cousin’s daily needs as she gradually succumbed to multiple sclerosis. He bathed her,
changed her diapers and feminine pads, and did whateverelse was necessary. He never shed a tear during our
conversation.
“I had to grow up fast. I had a job to do, and no one
else was there to do it. Now I run my businesses four days
a week so I can care for my mom the other days.”
The “black and white” theme reemerged.
“That sounds difficult,” I replied.
“It is what it is. It’s black and white. No complaining.
When my cousin was near the end, she said she wanted to
be buried back in Missouri, so I told her not to worry, we
would take care of it. But I knew transporting her body
would cost a lot. So, after she died, we rented a casket,
bought flowers, displayed a beautiful picture of her during
the funeral, and then donated her body to science so we
didn’t have to buy a casket or plot. She didn’t know the
difference. She was already in heaven anyway. I plan to do
the same for my mother. She wants to be buried in Tennessee where she was born, and I told her I would take care
of it. But I have a kid in college and business expenses. I
can’t afford to send her body back to Tennessee. I would
rather spend money on her now when she can appreciate
it. Like I said, I buy her flowers every week.”
As Sam spoke, he evoked the image of a lonely soldier
standing sentry on a cold, dark, and ancient fortress wall,
guarding against the enemy lurking in the shadows. I realized that he stood post for his cousin who died of multiple
sclerosis, guarded those walls until death overwhelmed her.
Then he stood post for his mother, who was given 6
months but was still alive a year later. And through it all,
he guarded his own family.
I was saddened by the thought of Sam promising his
mother a simple white cross under an ancient oak tree in
Tennessee but instead donating her body to science. I said
a silent prayer for Sam to one day be able to lay down his
weapon, descend the wall, turn his face toward the sky, and
breathe.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C027
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: Chris’ Tears

As soon as I arrived for morning rounds, the resident
pulled me aside and said, “You need to talk to Chris.”
“Why?”
“Mr. Simons died last night, and Chris took it pretty
hard. He was crying.”
I was attending on the inpatient medicine service of
our VA hospital and had come in for Saturday morning
rounds. Chris was a medical student on the first clinical
rotation of his junior year. When he started his rotation,
one of the patients he picked up was Mr. Simons. At 6 feet,
5 inches, Mr. Simons had been a big, strong farmer. Even
into his 80s, he had been working every day and reigning
as the patriarch of a large, close-knit rural Indiana family
until, over several years, a series of events had turned him
into a dependent invalid. Renal cancer required a nephrectomy. Recurrence in the other kidney required a second
nephrectomy and chronic hemodialysis. A stroke left him
hemiparetic and aphasic but cognitively intact. He became
frustrated and depressed at his inability to communicate or
care for himself, let alone lead his family. His world was
crashing around him, slowly, inexorably.
Hailing from rural Indiana himself, Chris became engrossed in Mr. Simons’ care. He seemed to understand and
resonate with the old man and his family. He fussed over
everyday medical details before and after rounds, and it was
clear that the Simonses saw Chris as “The Doctor.” Although not fully comfortable in that role, Chris accepted it
and worked hard to maximize his patients’ care and minimize discomfort.
Mr. Simons had extensive arteriosclerosis, which caused
not only a stroke but also multiple small heart attacks and
intermittent, severe bouts of angina. On two occasions, episodes of chest pain resulted in his being transferred to intensive care where a different set of doctors and nurses would care
for him for a few days. Although he always returned to our
care after his ICU stays, such interruptions were upsetting to
Mr. Simons and his family. One day, Chris came to me and
asked, “Why do we keep doing this?”
“Doing what?” I replied.
“Moving Mr. Simons to the ICU when he gets chest
pain.”
“To watch him closely, treat him more aggressively,
hopefully prevent a heart attack, monitor for arrhythmias,
and so forth.”
“To what end? He’s going to die, sooner rather than
later, and all we’re doing is prolonging his suffering or even
making it worse. It really upsets him when he goes into the
ICU. They don’t treat him well.”
“How so?”
“They don’t spend time with him. They don’t try to
understand him when he can’t get the words out. They do
the work, but they don’t seem to care for him.”
“So, what do you want to do?”
“Make him a DNR. Don’t minimize his care on the
wards, but don’t send him to the unit if he gets chest pain.
Don’t resuscitate him if he codes.”
We agreed that we would treat his chest pain with
morphine and other medications as needed, but we would
not move him into intensive care, nor would we resuscitate
him. Mr. Simons and his family agreed with the plan and
seemed relieved.
It was a couple of nights later, while our team was on
call, that Mr. Simons died. Chris was one of the first there
and was the primary communicant with the family. He
brought the family into the room. He then stood quietly in
the corner, shedding silent tears.
I spoke to Chris after rounds the next morning and
asked him what had happened. He described the event and
was satisfied that we had treated Mr. Simons well, and that
his death was as peaceful as possible. He thought the family
was satisfied with his care.
“How about you? Are you OK?”
“Yeah,” he said. Clearly embarrassed, he added, “I
kinda got emotional, too.”
Later that day, I called Mr. Simons’ daughter, who
had served as the spokesperson for his large, extended family. I told her I was sorry he had passed and hoped she and
her family were doing OK. Was there anything they
wanted to know from us?
“You know,” she told me, “we are a very religious family.
We believe that God takes an active hand in our lives. We
believe that everything that happens to us is done by God, for
a reason. I must say that for years, we had questioned why
God was making Dad suffer so much. The cancers, the stroke,
the heart attacks, his inability to care for himself, to even
talk—God was doing this to Dad, and we couldn’t figure out
why. At times, we were angry at God for making Dad suffer.
But now we understand why God was doing this. He did it to
help make Chris a better doctor.”
In the dark of night in a small room in a VA hospital
in the heartland, a family gathered to say goodbye to the
man who had been its anchor for more than 60 years.
There were weeping, hugs, and whispers of comfort. And
there was Chris, in the corner, whose tears had given
meaning to a family’s years of suffering and reaffirmed
their faith in God and our healing profession.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C028
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: Jitterbug

The rhythmic beat of once-familiar swing music jogged
my memory. Was it "One O'Clock Jump" or "Cottontail"? I know I'd heard it before, many times long ago. The
radio station seldom played music of the old swing bands.
As a teenager, I had worked summers on Atlantic
City's boardwalk and went every weekend to the Steel
Pier's Marine Ballroom to hear the great bands—^Woody
Herman, Artie Shaw, Benny Goodman, Tommy and
Jimmy Dorsey, and all the others. Did I hear it there?
Suddenly, I remembered a patient, Gladys Spink, and
smiled. Gladys Spink! It all came back. I hadn't seen her in
over 30 years.
She was a large, frumpy woman in her late 60s who
always sat in the community clinic's large waiting area with
her eyes shut. Perhaps dozing. I was never sure. A diabetic
and hypertensive with a long, sad face, she moved and
spoke very slowly. I originally thought that she may be
hypothyroid, but her test results were always normal. Over
the 5 years she had been my patient, I seldom saw her
smile. A childless widow, she lived alone on the top floor of
an old three-decker house in the neighborhood.
One day, after I had finished routinely advising her to
lose weight, see the dietitian, and take her medications, I
asked her, "What was the best job you ever had?"—a tactic
that had led several elderly patients to open up and share a
few memories of a happier time in their lives.
She paused a moment, then smiled faindy. "Well,
Doctor, I haven't thought about it for a very long time. I
hope you won't think less of me, but I was once a ballroom
hostess in New York City. Really, a professional dancer. It
was a dime-a-dance kind of place in Times Square. My
parents never approved of it. It wasn't dignified enough.
That was the time of the big swing bands of the 40s and
50s. You're probably too young to remember them."
"Oh no, Mrs. Spink. I do."
A coquettish grin crossed her face. "I even had a professional name, known to all the customers who asked for
me. Of course I didn't want to give out my real name. It
wouldn't have been proper."
"What was it?"
"I called myself Pat Allen. Nothing flashy."
"I bet you must have been very good. Did you have a
favorite dance?"
"Oh, yes. When it first came out, it was called the
Lindy Hop. That was around the time of Charles Lindbergh. Then, later, everybody knew it as the jitterbug. A
strange name, wasn't it? I started dancing as a teenager, like
all the girls then. You know, we were bobbysoxers with
saddle shoes, pleated short skirts, and sweaters. I decided to
keep that as my uniform when I started to get paid. The
customers all liked it. I had a special partner who came
around every night—my late husband, George. He was
quite the dancer. We even created a few steps that others
copied. Then there was the Korean War . . . and I gave up
dancing."
A mofnentary pause. She brightened up.
"I could easily do all the over-the-shoulder acrobatic
lifts, the between-his-legs sliding pull-throughs, the fast
turns, and the frenzied steps. We even won a jitterbug
contest downtown once and went up to the Savoy Ballroom in Harlem to compete with the best. Didn't win, but
it was quite a thrill."
It was hard to imagine her as a "hepcat," an acrobatic
jivey swinger. I made a note in her chart and set up the
usual return appointment in 3 months.
She sat in the waiting area, eyes closed, purse on her
lap, with roUed-up stockings and sensible shoes. I called
out, "Pat Allen!" She opened her eyes, blinked a few times,
then smiled. I took her arm as we walked into my office.
Before we sat down, I asked, "Come on, Ms. Allen. I don't
have a dime, but would you do me the honor of dancing
with me? Just a few steps?"
She put her purse down on a chair and took off her
shoes.
"What was your favorite Lindy Hop song?"
"Do you remember Glenn Miller's 'In the Mood'?"
"Of course I do. Let's hum it together."
Never an agile dancer, I remembered a little, a few easy
twirls. She moved quickly, gracefiilly, helping me along.
Our dance lasted only a minute or so. I'm sure my stodgy
medical school professors would have been shocked seeing
us. But then, what did they really know?
"What a nice surprise," she said. "Thank you.
Doctor."
She curtsied. I bowed. Then we sat and discussed her
recent blood tests, diet, and medications.
Every appointment after that I referred to her as "Ms.
Allen."
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C029
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: Once Upon a July (Saved)

Don't get sick in July. This adage stems from fear that
patient care at a teaching hospital in July is delivered
by brand-new physicians, sometimes with more confidence
than competence. Before recent reforms in residency training, this concern was compounded by uneven oversight of
attending physicians.
Once upon a July, 20 years ago now, I was that newly
minted doctor. Through hard work and serendipity, I had
gained entrance to a prestigious university medical center
that a friend called "the Mecca." If you were privileged
enough to serve there, your worthiness and dedication to
your calling were unquestioned.
By nature, I was not one of those interns who felt that
that I belonged there or that I deserved to be there. I was
filled with anticipation, excitement, and mostly . . . anxiety. How would I get through the first day/week/mo nth
without hurting a patient or embarrassing myself? I assumed that I would need help, and maybe a lot of it, from
my resident, my fellow, my attending, and possibly even
my co-interns that month. Maybe a phone call to my parents for moral support would be required if things went
really badly. It had not occurred to me, though, that I may
need guidance from the "less-educated" members of the
team, the ones who are at the bedside around the clock.
The nurses.
Arrival at the Mecca commenced with orientation. My
intern class was briefed on a host of topics, ranging from
the mundane (ID badges and parking) to the more serious
(the mental and physical health of ourselves and our colleagues). A parade of important people welcomed us and
offered sage advice. One instructed us on communication
of all sorts. We were advised, "Nurses are your friends.
Most have been here a very long time. Listen to them." At
the time, I remembered it, though it did not resonate with
me. "Good advice," I thought, "but enough already with
orientation."
Then, the day before our clinical rotations started, I
drew the proverbial short straw. It was so short that it was
like no straw at all. Not only was my first assignment on
the challenging inpatient hematology/oneology service
with its infamous reputation, but I was assigned to take call
on the first day and night. This was the only inpatient
rotation where the interns were left: alone at night when the
supervising resident went home once the patients were
"stable."
As I soon learned, on this ward "stable" was a relative
term. Here resided the sickest of the sick, their immune
systems decimated by their illnesses (think leukemia) and
their treatments (think high-dose chemotherapy or bone
marrow transplants). They came from all over the region to
receive treatment at the Mecca, often staying a month or
more, each day with an increasing risk for hospitalacquired infections and equally deadly despair Most of the patients were "liquids": those with hématologie malignancies, such as acute myelogenous leukemia,
acute lymphoblastic leukemia, multiple myeloma, and the
like. Those with solid tumors were much easier, because
the chemotherapy did not devastate their bodies in quite
the same way, their courses of chemotherapy were shorter,
and they recovered faster and had some remaining immune
ftinction. The "liquids," however, were more taxing. They
could crash and burn at any time, and they often did.
How could I have been the first intern in my class of
31 to be subjected to this? Didn't the program directors
knowi I didn't really belong here anyway—should I tell
them? But I must have been ready, because I had my handbook. Written for the housestaff by the truly outstanding
"liquid" attendings, the handbook held between its yellow
covers the basics of graft-versus-host disease, oncologic
emergencies, and what to consider on the umpteenth night
of neutropenic fever. Yes, I was ready. So, in the days
before global connectivity, iPhones, and UpToDate, I had
my white coat with traditionally bulging pockets, the yellow handbook, and some advice from orientation stored in
my head.
About midnight on that first night, after my supervising resident had left, a nurse called me in to see a patient
with leukemia who was the prototype of the medically
challenging "liquid" patient. He had developed the rigors
that can accompany a fever or severe infection. He was
already receiving an alphabet soup of antimicrobials, and
he had no white cells. He looked sick, both chronically and
acutely, and it scared me. He scared me.
The nurse asked me what I wanted to do for this. As I
helplessly watched his discomfort, I felt that the nurse was
watching as the blood drained from my face. She calmly
said, "This is common when people are getting ampho."
She nodded toward his IV pole where his now-empty bag
of amphotericin hung. I nodded, looking at her expectantly. Surely, she had worked on this unit at least since I
was in kindergarten.
She continued, "Usually we use Demerol to treat this.
Would you like to order that?" Relief washed over me.
"Yeah, sure. How much?" I asked. And she continued,
"Given his size and kidney fianction, 50 mg will work."
"Okay, please give Demerol, 50 mg IV." As the rigors
ceased, both my patient and I enjoyed a reprieve. The rest
of the night, he remained comfortable. And alive. He was
"stable." And I was learning.
The days and nights that followed brought more calls
and bedside evaluations, many more serious than that one.
But the tone had been set, at least in my view. The nurse's
calm demeanor and respectful communication were not
lost on me. Calm is good. Offering, asking for, and accepting help are wonderftil tools and can be done without
demeaning a colleague. And although our education as
physicians provides a unique medical expertise, -we can all
learn something from an experienced nurse.
These lessons continue to serve me well in my current
work as a hospitalist. The nurses save me in. some way
every day, with their humor, their respect, their attention
to detail, and their clinical acumen. But the first time that
I remember a nurse saving me, in that brief encounter, I
understood that nurses are my allies and have much to
teach me. Twenty years later, they still aré and they still do.
I try to thank the nurses every day. Especially in July.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C030
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: Legacy

I did my grieving in the days following my father's
diagnosis. Just 2 weeks after the birth of my first child, a
son, and his only grandchild, I was in no place emotionally
to begin a headlong dive into mourning, but that is exacdy what happened. When he handed me his CT scan
report—pancreatic mass, liver métastases, and lytic bone
lesions—I knew that Dad had litde time.
I work as an obstetrician near the medical facility
where Dad started treatment. He allowed me to go with
him to the first appointment. Leaving bottles of pumped
breast milk at home with my husband, I accompanied my
parents to meet the doctor and begin their long journey
into living with terminal cancer. After I broke down in
tears when the doctor asked me how we all were doing, I
was banned from future appointments. Dad didn't want
me to hear any bad news. To him, I was his daughter, not
a doctor. It didn't occur to him that I already knew the
worst. I already knew how it would end, and I had already
started to mourn.
On that first visit to the oncologist. Dad took a litde
piece of paper on which he'd written some specific questions. Even though he never let me see that list, I knew that
one of the questions, the one he didn't say out loud in
front of me was, "How long do I have?" His physician
patted him on the shoulder and said that they'd get started
with chemotherapy first and discuss prognosis later.
Dad spent hours dissecting Internet articles that described stage rV pancreatic cancer, but he never had an
open conversation with his treating physician about the
natural history of his disease. I remembered theories of
grief from medical school, and I watched as Dad bounced
back and forth between denial and anger. He tried to convince himself that his pancreatic cancer was somehow different from what he read about online. He became angry
when no one, including me, would espouse the theory that
Zocor was the cause of his disease. Pricklier than ever, he
lashed out at my mom for the smallest things, and I tried
to comfort her by explaining that this was his attempt at
coping. All the while, I prayed he would realize that there
wasn't any time to waste on pettiness. I spoke with hini
carefully, trying to discern the extent of his insight, and
answered him honestly, but I was unable to help my father
understand he was going to die. I had faith that his oncologists, stewards of the dying, were going to walk him
through that difiBcult revelation. Both of us, my father and
I, were mistaken in our expectations.
When he was a young boy, my dad considered becoming a physician, but one summer his father, a physics professor, took him to the Princeton University campus where
Dad saw the beautiful buildings and decided to devote his
life to creating monuments. Dad was a brilliant architect,
dedicated to the details, pouring over Vitruvius, and aspiring to Palladio. He studied his clients with an equal fervorgetting to know them personally and connecting on a deep
level, all while performing his art with intellect and honesty. He would have been an exceptional doctor. Struggling financially to provide for our family, I always wondered if he regretted choosing architecture over medicine.
He was just interested enough and just intelligent
enough about medical principles to be dangerous and even
annoying at times (hence the Zocor obsession). Although
he admired doctors, he was also skeptical that they had
their patients' best interests in mind. This mistrust was
explicit at the end. One evening I was sitting with him as
he lay in bed after a particularly exhausting series of chemotherapy treatments and procedures, during which another week had passed without seeing or talking to his
doctor. He could barely speak as he was so tired, but he
voiced to me his disappointment that his treating physician
never called to check up on him.
I tried to make excuses, saying how busy he probably
was, how many people he served, how maybe he didn't
realize how desperately ill Dad was feeling. But my father
was so angry, and unfortunately, it's one of the few conversations from the last few months that will be forever
engraved on my memory. "These doctors," he said to me,
his doctor-daughter, "What sons of bitches they are." Tears
were coming to his eyes, and mine. "They don't even call
you to check on you when you feel like you're dying."
Even as a lowly architect, he continued, he was constantly calling his clients, past and present, to just to say,
"Hello." He could not comprehend how the medical professionals, especially oncologists, did not do the same.
It was the only time I called his doctors, and I spoke to
the nurse practitioner, apologetic for the intrusion but asking if they could call my dad at some point just to check in
on him. She was sympathetic, and she called him later that
week. Dad was appreciative but still felt neglected by his
doctor and justified in his cynicism.
Maybe it is true that some people never graduate from
a certain stage of grief and that no matter where the grieving person is, that is where others should allow him to be.
I couldn't help wondering though if a lack of open communication with his physician hindered Dad's process of
letting go. He would get angry with us when we asked him
how he was feeling. He'd take our hands and place them
on his bony shoulders and say, "How do you think I'm
feeling?"
As he grew weaker, thinner, sicker, he asked again, this
time of another physician, "What are my chances?" That
doctor replied that Dad had a 50/50 chance.
"What do you mean 'a 50/50 chance'?" I asked my
mom when they came home with this latest report. I was
gende but honest with her in explaining that the statement
made no sense, but she felt better holding onto even the
thinnest strand of hope while I felt the burden of Dad's
diagnosis grow heavier. After each doctor's visit, as Mom
would relay word for word what was said, I became more
frustrated. My father was wasting away before our eyes,
and he knew it, but no one, not one provider, took his
hand and dared to face the anger and sadness with him. He
even told me that the doctor had stopped touching him at
his visits. The doctor used to feel his belly, increasingly
distended with fluid ahd tumor, or pat his shoulders to feel
the lack of muscle mass, but now he just breezed in, said a
few things, and was gone.
The result was that my father never got prepared. One
week before he died and 6 months into treatment, he was
admitted to the hospital after his weekly appointment because he was too weak for Mom to get him to the car. His
doctor was out of town at the time, but during the overnight admission, one of the young doctors in the group
finally had a conversation approaching reality with Dad.
He explained in a kind but straightforward way that the
chemotherapy had not worked and they needed to stop
treatment. He recommended that Dad go home with
hospice.
That night I stopped by the hospital room after my
shift was over. I was nervous to see him after this conversation because I thought it might escalate his defensiveness.
Instead, he had more relief on his face than I had seen in
months. He actually smiled at me and took my hand when
I came to the bedside. Finally, it was out of his hands.
Finally, he could rest.
By this point there was no time to get things ready.
Once we took him home with hospice, it was just a matter
of days before he was, gone. The last thing he said to us
was, "It wasn't supposed to be this way. I thought I had
• more time."
Two days after his death, we received a copy of the
death certificate, signed by Dad's physician who had been
caring for him the last 6 months of his life. There was
never any phone call, never any card. It was like his time in
treatment had never happened. Maybe, I reasoned, this is
how it's handled in the real world, even though I had done
more for my patients with cancer as a busy gynecology
resident.
Facing the shortcomings of my profession and how
much it disappointed my father and my family when it.
mattered most compounded the grief I felt in Dad's death.
Every day as I drive by the hospital where Dad was treated,
I am disturbed by the thought that what our family experienced is being repeated daily in a medical culture that
avoids guiding patients and their families through these
difficult dialogues. So many dollars spent and so many
papers written on genes and therapies' that may, possibly,
lead us closer to a cure. But the physician's arts of compassion, brave words, and gentle touch has never eluded us.
To the terminally ill and the families they will leave behind, there may be no treatment more important than
these.
Many physicians excel in meeting patients in their
grief and they struggle right alongside them until the end.
Other physicians, including those who cared for my father,
do not. They should do better. Let's make ourselves da
better, so that our profession is known for its humanity as
well as its science. And if that's not what we're striving for,
then maybe all of us should have chosen architecture
instead.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C031
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: Distant Wheezes

To prepare the mind for medicine, nothing surpasses bird
watching—birding, to its active practitioners. Both birding and diagnosis demand and reward many of the same
traits. Each vocation brings its world into sharp focus and
provides endless variety. To study birds and their migrations is
to have one’s finger on the pulse of the planet. The ICD-9
and the world’s avifauna each contain nearly 10 000
entries—if you include such terms as “accident involving
spacecraft” and “diabolical nightjar,” respectively. Birds and
infections achieve dazzling and confounding diversity in the
tropics. Each may gain latitude and altitude with climate
change. Both invite endless discovery, the occurrence of each
bird and malady often routine but occasionally stunning.
Common things being common, identifying both birds
and disease requires a basic understanding of probability.
They are easier to identify in context, either bird or rash from
a photo more challenging than in the field. Some gulls and
shorebirds require age determination before they can be
named. Gender matters, too—many birds and maladies are
classically described by features found in males. Lest we forget
that coronary disease in women may present without angina,
a female scarlet tanager is green, and a female black-throated
blue warbler is neither black-throated nor blue.lent migrants with vocal resident species in the autumn
woods, like vascular disease with diabetes. I think often of
Sam, who was visiting his daughter while she was undergoing
chemotherapy, when an unprovoked thrombosis with mild
anemia announced his own silent stomach cancer the way
clamoring crows betray a sleeping owl on its daytime roost.
Variably confiding and secretive, some healthy birds and less
healthy humans are more active at night.
You will detect and identify a lot more birds and illnesses
if you listen. In the forest, many birds are first detected by
sound—if at all—and some visually identical species are distinguishable only by their voices. Diagnosis without the history is like birding without the song. It is said that the patient
will tell you the diagnosis if given the opportunity. One patient of mine did so with improbable precision. During treatment for a urinary tract infection, she presented with rapidly
worsening dyspnea. Her chest radiograph showed diffuse infiltrates, but her symptoms did not suggest pneumonia or
congestive heart failure. After presenting her with the inconclusive results of various studies and assuring her that we
would keep at it until we figured it out, I asked if she had any
ideas to explain her symptoms.
“I reckon it was that antibiotic they give me,” she
replied immediately.
Meaningful glances and faint smiles among our team surrounding her bed gently dismissed her naive theory. Then
came a moment of silence as we regrouped in the hall, humbled by the realization that she had nitrofurantoin lung.
To bird or doctor well requires keen eyes and ears for
detail: alert to the distant wheeze of a gnatcatcher in the treetops or the narrowed airways in a barrel chest, the tinge of
yellow in a jaundiced eye or in the throat of a “little brown
job” in the underbrush, the faint shadow across the face of a
thrush or of a young woman with fatigue and arthralgia. Pivotal field marks are said to be diagnostic. You have to tune out
background noise to hear the unfamiliar song, to suppress
pager and schedule to listen to a new patient’s story. One
approaches each individual with an open mind, to notice deviations from the pattern. The third sandpiper from the left
feeds with a different posture; this fellow with a backache can’t get
comfortable at night. The more experience with common varieties, the easier it is to spot exceptions, provided you don’t become
jaded and stop paying attention. Of recognizing both strange bird
and rare or subtle disease, chance favors the prepared mind.
Pattern recognition is often easy—a flamingo or an
asthma flare—but sparrows and delirium require some discernment. To an experienced observer, the briefest glimpse of
a passing hawk, a single call note in the dark, pursed lips, or
pill-rolling tremor in a crowd may afford diagnostic certainty.
On the other hand, to identify a Nutting’s flycatcher, it helps
to see inside its mouth. A silent Empidonax and a mute, ill
elder both mock my abilities. Some elusive birds and symptoms must be let go unnamed (or perhaps NOS), but another
quiet walk through the same patch of woods or data may still
yield the answer. Surgeons sometimes say the intense focus of
the operating room shuts out all other concerns; so, too, the
concentrated view through a spotting scope. The radiologist
wants a better angle, the dermatologist better light, the birder
both. Physicians, at least, are usually unhindered by foliage or
weather conditions. Birders have the advantage, though, of
observing their subjects in their natural habitats.
Both prone to obsession, doctors and birders in groups
share a boundless capacity to bore nonmembers of their
learned societies. Both seem to thrive on the stories they
accumulate. There are the intellectual and altruistic—for
doctors—rewards of “getting it,” but also the distinct ego gratification of having gotten it. A “good case” and a “good bird”
have similar meaning, both subject to correct identification
and to peer review. You don’t want to be either one. Birds far
beyond their physiologic boundaries may not find their way
home alive, either. Both pursuits require attention, patience,
mindfulness, and clarity; both are fraught with uncertainty
and subject to human error, a birder’s embarrassing at worst.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C032
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: Disparities in Medicine: An Unsettling Lesson

He was handsome, with dark, defined eyebrows and
long black bangs on smooth olive skin. He was
clearly in pain, but he refused to cry. By the definition
in his biceps and the “cool” swagger of his gait, I
guessed he was about 20 years old.
He came in clinging to a simple white envelope in
his left hand; his right hand was wrapped in a bundle of
dirty towels. It was a slow afternoon in the emergency
department, so several doctors and nurses were available
to ask him basic questions: “¿Que´ estaba haciendo cuando
ocurrio´? ¿Tiene dolor? ¿Cua´ntos an˜os tiene?”
It happened while he was working in a factory. Yes,
he was in a lot of pain. And his age? Fourteen.
Like other patients who arrived in the emergency
department at this large public hospital in Honduras,
he sat on 1 of 2 vinyl examination tables. The room
smelled of blood from previous patients—machete
wounds, gunshots, car accidents. The clean-up crew
consisted of an elderly woman and a dirty mop. No
disinfectant. No sterilization. No paper barrier on the
examination tables.
Despite the pain in his hand, he was surprisingly
calm and composed. A nurse removed the towels to
expose the wound. Suddenly, it looked like a scene from
“The Itchy & Scratchy Show”— his thumb was gone,
and an artery squirted blood in synchrony with the
rhythmic pulse of his heart. The fully exposed bone
distorted his hand’s anatomy. The doctors, excited to
have visiting medical students from New York City,
urged us in for a closer look. “Take pictures!” they encouraged, perhaps hopeful that a positive experience in
their hospital would lure us back to Honduras later in
our medical careers.
The boy became woozy and had to lie down while the
doctor cleaned the wound. With a glimmer of relief, he
passed his cherished envelope to the doctor. The doctor
took a quick glance, shook his head, and tossed it back on
the table. The boy appeared confused. Why weren’t they
preparing his thumb for reattachment? His face grimaced
in despair. The doctor finished washing the wound with
antiseptic and sewed the remaining flaps of skin over the
stump.
I felt disheartened and powerless. As a first-year
medical student, I still identified more with the patient
than with his doctors. I was uncomfortable in his silence; why wasn’t he questioning his doctors? I wanted
to explain to him what was happening and why, but I
didn’t have the language skills or medical expertise to
communicate effectively. I wanted to fix all the circumstances and inequities that landed him in this situation.
I was frustrated the rest of that afternoon. Suddenly, the muggy heat and flies vexed me. I whined
about having to use my personal hand sanitizer because
soap was not readily available in the hospital. I grimaced
as doctors opted not to use gloves when patients had
only minor bleeding. And I watched detached doctors
socializing while treating patients in unbearable pain
with life-threatening trauma wounds. The boy had
given me a new awareness of how health care in this
poor, underserved community could change a person’s
life, and I couldn’t stop comparing care in his world to
care in mine.
Since leaving Honduras, the troubling health disparities between our worlds continue to preoccupy me.
The boy worked hours away from the hospital, and
neither he nor his coworkers knew that amputated
body parts need to be kept cold to remain viable. (This,
however, was a moot point, because the hospital was
not equipped for neurovascular reattachment.) That
wouldn’t happen where I’m from. In fact, none of this
would happen where I’m from. In Paradise Valley, Arizona, 14-year-old children don’t have occupational hazards
because they don’t have occupations. And if they do suffer
accidental injuries, they have quick access to medical care.
And they have families to advocate on their behalf. And they
are in a country with the technology and resources to perform
surgical wound debridements, skin grafts, and neurovascular
reattachments.
As a surgical patient during my teenage years, I got
care that a 14-year-old boy in rural Honduras could never
dream of receiving. But then, so did my friend’s dog,
Steeler.
My friend adores his dog and provides him with a
lovely life—it’s a running joke among our friends that
we’d all like to be reincarnated as Steeler. So when
Steeler was hit by a car a few months ago, it wasn’t
surprising that my friend took an overnight flight from
India to the United States, despite the cost of a lastminute ticket. Steeler wasn’t in good condition: He was
in the doggie ICU (DICU, as my friends joked), was
incontinent, and was paralyzed in his hind legs. So the
dog stayed in the DICU for a few weeks, receiving 24-
hour care, intravenous pain medications, and a catheter.
A CT scan showed an intact spinal column despite broken vertebrae. With each e-mail update about the dog’s
health, I grew more uncomfortable—I thought back to
the conditions in Honduras and the boy who received
less care than a dog in the United States.
Meeting the boy in Honduras left me with a host of
questions about my future role as a physician. The Honduran doctors’ limited goal of patient stabilization isn’t bad
medicine—it’s the best they can do with their resources.
But how do I resolve this lack of social justice? How will I
narrow the divide through my career? Still early in medical
school, I’m accustomed to facts and clearly defined answersto guide me. But here, there are no multiple-choice answers to offer clean resolution.
I think about the boy in Honduras often. When I left
the Honduran hospital that steamy afternoon, I saw him
wandering in the dirt outside, seemingly lost. I wondered
what he would do without his right thumb. How would he
work and support himself? How would his family and
community respond to his injury? Would he be less desirable to women? Would the “cool” swagger of his gait be
permanently lost?
I still wonder.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C033
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: Discovery at the Bedside

Recently, I was assigned to care for a 15-year-old girl
with ataxia telangiectasia, the debilitating neurodegenerative disease that lacks an adequate DNA repair mechanism. The girl’s documents revealed a history of repeated hospitalizations for pulmonary infections. Most
recently, during a 10-day course of unremitting pneumonia, ciprofloxacin-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa was
cultured from her sputum. This time, the patient’s symptoms included a temperature up to 39.5 °C accompanied
by greenish productive cough, shortness of breath, and
pleuritic chest pain for the past 3 days. On auscultation of
her lungs, I noticed decreased breath sounds on the right,
and wet rales could be heard diffusely. Routine blood tests
supported an infectious origin. With ataxia telangiectasia
being a cancer-prone genetic condition, the use of ionizing
radiation was to be restricted. We opted to do chest radiography only when absolutely necessary rather than to provide a baseline cardiothoracic window. Yet, even without
imaging to confirm our presumptive diagnosis, pneumonia
was the most reasonable explanation for her symptoms. We
started therapy with the same medications that had worked
for the patient during her last hospitalization, but to cover
atypical organisms, we also sent a sample of her sputum to
the laboratory.
While hoping for a response to antibiotics, I went to
the library. A Science article from 1995 announced an exciting research finding. The discovery of a single gene,
ATM (ataxia telangiectasia mutated), that may underlie the
pathogenesis of the disease was regarded a major breakthrough. I was curious to learn what clinical implications
had been created by biological research into the ATM gene
in the 15 years since its identification. I began to extract
relevant articles from MEDLINE. Several papers focused
on ATM inhibitors as novel radiosensitizers that may better
target cancer cells. Other than these, however, most citations linked to basic research that was still remote from any
practical utilization. The sequencing of the gene might
have been the culmination of a virtuous, creativity-laden
research project, yet its promise for patients suffering from
malicious neurodegenerative diseases had not even begun
to be fulfilled. I returned to the department disappointed.
A few days later the girl’s cough gradually began to subside, her fever abated, and her chest discomfort diminished.
Still, her mother mentioned that the patient had an irritating
pain located near her lower ribs. We dismissed it as secondary
to her contained pulmonary infection. Antibiotics should alleviate the infectious process, and the discomfort would inevitably fade, we reassured the worried mother.
On morning rounds, we performed a brief assessment
but invested the lion’s share of the time on scholarly topics.
We discussed fetoprotein, a useful serum marker for
ataxia telangiectasia. We reviewed the recent surge in Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia among immunocompromised
patients. We reviewed the vast array of antimicrobials, discussing the latest alternatives to the standard antipseudomonal regimen. Always, it seemed, we favored the peculiar
over the familiar, covering a dozen topics but never the
very necessary procedure of clinical assessment. Tactile
fremitus and resonance failed to make it into our bedside
symposium.
There was no exception taken to our bedside agenda—
that is, except for one helpless voice. After the rounds, the
girl’s mother would approach me and repeat her concerns,
reminding me that our theoretical debates had not altered
her daughter’s serious condition. All I did was to promise
to wield all the knowledge and available means for the
benefit of her daughter.
The next morning, we realized that the lower rib pain
had become the poor girl’s nightmare. Her breathing became labored, and her posture was almost twisted in an
attempt to reduce the severe pain. Chest radiography became a vital necessity, and the images were strikingly abnormal. A huge pneumothorax threatened to compress the
mediastinum and shift the opposite lung. We called the
pediatric surgery department immediately. The girl was
transported to the pediatric intensive care unit, where a
chest tube was inserted. The procedure was successful, and
she recovered within a few days.
Sometime later, I participated in a bedside tutorial in
our cardiology department. The cardiologist emphasized
some very basic physical examination tools. From head to
toe, he encouraged us to exploit every physical sign to aid
in diagnosis. He joked that a medical student’s lung percussion skills may roughly correlate with his or her cumulative period on the wards.
His advice struck a deep chord with me. I recalled my
own omission of basic clinical skills in my patient with
ataxia telangiectasia and the concealed pneumothorax. The
traditional physical examination should have come first
and would have served me well, as it would have the patient and her mother, whose supplemental history I had
ignored. This case, in the age of high technology and molecular biology, brought home to me the importance of
first principles: the history and physical examination.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C034
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: The Whole Story

You can’t imagine what you can know about your patients,” my quality assurance director began. We were
sitting in my office side by side, staring at the computer
together. After long months of grading my quality performance and suggesting ways to improve my scores, the director found some time to help me develop more intimate
relations with the BINA (intelligence) quality control computer program.
“This program will enable you to analyze, compartmentalize, categorize, and integrate data in a way that will
tell you everything about your patients,” she promised.
“You will also see why they aren’t balanced in terms of
weight, blood pressure, cholesterol, glucose—and you’ll see
why they adamantly refuse to come even close to reaching
the numbers they should be reaching on all those
measurements.
You and the other family doctors said that each case is
its own unique story. You protested that the statistics made
you look bad. To address this, our best minds came up
with this program, where you can assess each case on an
individual level. Believe me, when you try this, you will
find it absolutely wonderful!”
On she went. “Let’s take a look at this patient. According to the table, he has four risk factors with a high LDL
cholesterol level.”
I squirmed in my chair when the system quickly
pointed out Sammy’s four risk factors: male, 54 years old,
smoker, and high blood pressure. His LDL was 157. What
a disgrace! I was ashamed.
“I prescribed statins,” I muttered, “and I even increased his dosage when he didn’t reach the target levels.”
The quality assurance director continued to perform
her magical data-collecting stunts.
“Let’s review the system monitoring his medicine distribution. Okay, here we can see that over the last 3
months he has taken only one prescription, on average, for
each of the five medications he regularly receives!” She
gleamed. “The medicine distribution system receives realtime input from all of the pharmacies that have agreements
with the HMO. This way we can assess the patient’s
compliance!”
I let out a heavy sigh. I knew Sammy very well. Every
morning at 5 a.m. he arrives at the market in the city,
selling parsley and basil from his very own fields. On Fridays, he sells flowers. In the afternoons, he works as a
handyman in peoples’ homes. Just this week, Sammy told
me his most beloved daughter was getting married, and he
wanted to buy her a nice gift.
Sammy also told me with a proud smile that every
month he takes only some of his medication, saving the
money for other necessities. Last month there was an oil
leak in his old car that he uses to bring his goods to the
market every day. Two months ago his wife had a tooth
infection that required a root canal and a cap. And at the
end of August, he had to buy a nice new backpack for his
eldest grandchild who was going into the first grade. He
seemed quite pleased with his method.
“You prescribe five types of pills: three for blood pressure, one for cholesterol, and another one for heartburn.
Every time I go to the pharmacy I tell them, ‘Don’t give
me that one this time. I have a whole package at home.’
But the truth is, I take the pill for my blood pressure once
every two days, the little pink pill for heartburn I take
when it really hurts, and the cholesterol pill only when I’m
not so tight for money.” He is practically beaming as he
recounts his self-management system, almost as bright as
my quality assurance director is with her new system that
seems to know everything about him.
After we agree that I need to speak with Sammy about
his treatment compliance, another interesting piece of data
catches her eye.
“Look here. Sarah—an 82-year-old woman with diabetes. She hasn’t visited an eye doctor in 5 years! Hemoglobin A1c, 7.9. Her microalbumin–creatinine ratio has
not been checked in over a year. Not monitored, not balanced.” She doesn’t explicitly say that I am a horrible doctor, but I can feel the disappointment in her voice.
In my mind’s eye I travel to Sarah’s small house in the
village. She is a thin, upright woman, nearly transparent by
now, with a mound of white hair that endows her with a
majestic appearance. Sarah lives on her own, surrounded
by paints, decorated ceramic bowls, and clay birds of her
own production. Every holiday she brings me a ceramic
salad bowl, a plate to hang on the wall, or something she
created at the elderly citizen’s club, often painted in blues
and always so innocent, with a carefully and neatly applied
signature on the back.
Sarah is a Holocaust survivor. She was in Auschwitz.
She survived and immigrated to Israel, raised a small family, and tended to their modest farm. Sarah’s son died of
lymphoma in his early 20s. Her husband died of a heart
attack 1 year later; they said he died of “heartbreak.” Her
daughter gave birth to her only grandchild, who lives in the
big city. Sarah’s daughter died young as well—of breast
cancer.
Now, Sarah is completely alone, dying of lung cancer
after having smoked for many years. I haven’t been tracking her diabetes for months. We speak of so many other
things. Will she live long enough to see the rosebuds flower
in her garden? Will she have enough strength to hold a
paintbrush for a few consecutive minutes? Will she manage
to finish sculpting the candlesticks she is now working on
to sell them at the elderly citizen’s fair before the high
holidays?
In a confidential tone, Sarah shares that her granddaughter is pregnant, and she wants to have the chance tohug her great-grandchild, after decades of loneliness and
longing for her deceased loved ones. She shows me the
envelope she keeps in the drawer of her bedside table, next
to the oxygen device and the piles of narcotic medicines. I
know that inside that envelope lies her simple will, in
which she bestows her small house to her only granddaughter. Words such as “eye doctor” and “microalbumin”
have not entered our conversations for some years, and I’m
not sure I regret that.
The quality assurance director continues to scan the
tables and charts. “Oh, here’s Eli.” She marks his row in
yellow. “Male, age 45, LDL 240, and he smokes, with a
family history and very high risk. Medicines—he doesn’t
have any prescriptions. Perhaps you should invite him in
and offer him a statin. You agree with me that these are
unequivocal indications for such treatment?”
I agreed with her, indeed. I had invited Eli to come in
yesterday. I invited him last week as well. I even invited
myself to visit him at his mother’s home where he resides
to encourage him to start taking care of himself. I gave him
brochures, with pictures of vast green lawns, flowers, exercise rooms, and arts-and-crafts rooms at some of the best
rehabilitation centers in the country. Eli is an alcoholic, as
was his father. I treated his father throughout the months
of his deterioration from liver cancer. Eli is a charmer, with
sad, almond-shaped eyes. Ten years ago, when he worked
as a chef in a small country restaurant, he used to bring me
his freshly baked walnut bread or a jar of pesto sauce with
an unforgettable aroma. Eli was a talented cook and host,
and a pleasure to talk to. He now begins every morning
with a bottle of vodka, ending every long day in a haze of
anger, vomit, and self-loathing. He sometimes appears in
my office emanating a horrid odor, totally despondent. He
knows I remember him from his better days. He sits silently and cries. His mother comes more frequently, asking
if I have succeeded in reaching his heart and convinced him to
begin rehabilitation. He doesn’t want to go. He can stop
whenever he wants. He also doesn’t want medication—he
doesn’t believe in it. He believes in a healthy lifestyle, spiritual and clean. One day—when he has the strength.
“You see?” The quality assurance manager awakes me
from my wandering thoughts. “Our up-to-date online system can provide you with so much essential information
about your patients. You only need to look at it, and the
whole story is already there.”
Yes, there are many things I can know about my patients to help improve their health measurements, if only I
didn’t spend so many hours listening to their stories. Each
one leaves a deep imprint on my heart, a story that cannot
be quantified through numbers alone.
But I smile apologetically to the manager and promise
to improve my ways in the future.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C035
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: Taking Responsibility for Lung Cancer

While it thundered and rained outside one Thursday
evening, I sat comfortably in my office reading a
new report on TB. According to the article, the incidence
of TB has increased recently in China, especially in the
elderly population.
My mobile phone rang. It was Dr. Li, a physician and
good friend from my hometown. After catching up, his
voice grew serious. He told me that his lifelong friend, Mr.
Liu, had been coughing up blood, and there was a lesion in
his upper right lung on the chest radiograph. He thought it
could be cancer, although he hoped there could be another
explanation. I immediately suggested TB to break the uncomfortable silence. He disagreed because Mr. Liu is 65
years old, but I quickly brought up the article I was reading
about TB in China. He suggested that I evaluate Mr. Liu,
and I graciously agreed to help my old friend’s friend.
After viewing the x-ray, I was almost certain it was
cancer, but I kept this to myself. More work needed to be
done to be certain, so I referred him to my friend, Dr. Fan,
an oncologist. His clinic is in the building next to mine,
and I took Mr. Liu through the garden to get there, which
he enjoyed. When we arrived at Dr. Fan’s department, his
smile changed to a frown. The space consisted of row upon
row of beds, crowded with patients and their relatives.
After passing through the long corridor lined with extra beds, we came to Dr. Fan’s office. He was busy drawing
marks on the face of a patient. I could tell this was a
patient with nasopharyngeal carcinoma. After drawing on
another 4 patients, he washed his hands and took out a
pack of cigarettes from the upper pocket of his white coat
and handed one to me. I immediately noticed the red color
of the box, not the usual and most popular blue brand used
by the doctors here. The red is an obvious sign of social
status, as it is more expensive and rarely seen in daily life.
In China, sharing cigarettes with someone is a sign of
friendship and respect. It is therefore often difficult to
refuse the offer, even for a nonsmoker. As a result, it is a
very common practice to share cigarettes among doctors
themselves, and even among doctors and patients. About
45% of male doctors in China smoke. Only a small number of doctors advise their patients to quit smoking. Having recently returned from abroad, I am still not used to
the custom. With the cigarette in my right hand, I wondered whether it was appropriate to smoke in the office and
especially in front of a patient like Mr. Liu, who I suspected had lung cancer, the disease often caused by smoking. Dr. Fan stretched his right hand toward me with his
lighter. I put the cigarette between my lips and let him
light it. He then lit one for himself. Embarrassed, I could
feel my face turn red. I took a glance at Mr. Liu and his
wife, standing in front of the office door, waiting quietly
for us to examine Mr. Liu’s radiograph. Surprisingly, I
didn’t notice any change of expression on their faces; it
seems that they were used to watching their doctors smoke
in front of them. I relaxed as we started to examine the
chest radiograph through a veil of smoke, enjoying our
friendship and a feeling of harmony.
“I am almost sure this is cancer,” Dr. Fan said to me as
he pointed to the lesion on the film. “Of course we still
need the pathologic confirmation,” he added.
“Can it still be removed surgically?” I asked him. The
answer was no. The biopsy was arranged for the following
Tuesday.
On the way back to my office, as we passed through
the lush garden again, Mr. Liu said to me, “Please tell me
the truth when the pathologic results are available. I am
not afraid of death.”
On Sunday morning, while I was preparing slides for a
meeting, Mr. Liu called me and asked whether he and his
wife could come and have a chat. I agreed. Sitting in front
of me, he began his story. He was born in the old society
when the Chinese Nationalist Party was ruling China. He
told his story like a guest teacher coming from a factory
or farm to give political lectures to secondary school
students—something I have experienced many times before. “I quit school and started to work very early in my life
and overcame a great deal of painful events, as many people did in my generation,” he said quietly. He told me that
he once worked as a teacher in a primary school and later
became an accountant in his village. Then he was promoted to a department manager of a reservoir. He soon
lost that job, however, in the political turmoil. Without a
profession, life was hard. But since last year, he received
retirement pay. Because his working years were determined
from the first day he started to work, he is now paid well
and even has some extra to save. He looked at his wife,
who sat next to him listening to his story silently, and he
said, “But she does not have any income and has to rely on
me now. I do not know what she is going to do if I die.”
His wife started to sob.
“Don’t worry. Without the pathologic results, we are
not 100% sure if it’s cancer. Maybe it is just TB,” I told
him, hoping it would console her too.
Cancer or TB? Which one will be more likely? I asked
myself.
“Have you ever smoked?” I asked.
“Yes,” he gave me an honest answer.
“How many cigarettes do you smoke each day?”
“Only 1 pack a day.”
“How many years have you smoked already?”
“About 30 years.”
Silence.
A pack a day for 30 years surely had cost him a lot of
money, considering the lack of a steady income until a year
ago. Unfortunately, this is exactly the cause of his lung
cancer, I thought to myself.“I know someone who has lung cancer, but has never
smoked,” he broke the silence.
I wanted to tell him that about 90% of the lung cancer
patients are current or previous smokers and that smoking
is a major cause of lung cancer, although not an exclusive
one. Other factors have certainly been involved in the initiation and development of lung cancer. But it was not the
right time to talk about the causes of lung cancer, so I
stopped myself and just answered him with a smile.
When the pathology report arrived, it was indeed cancer.
Dr. Fan told me that for cases like Mr. Liu, patients would
first get argon-helium targeted ablation treatment to minimize
the size of the tumor, followed by chemotherapy and radiotherapy. “But, if his budget is very tight, he can go directly to
chemotherapy and radiotherapy,” Dr. Fan added. Mr. Liu
accepted Dr. Fan’s suggestion and started chemotherapy.
One evening, I stopped by Mr. Liu’s ward. At the
entrance, I saw a bed added in the corridor outside of his
room. A middle-aged male patient was cutting meat on his
bedside tray with a small knife, and there was a small pan
on the lower shelf of the bedside tray. Next to him, on the
floor was an electric stove, ready for cooking. I was quite
surprised by the scene. Turning left and entering Mr. Liu’s
room, I saw him lying on the bed and reading a newspaper.
Like the patient I just saw, his wife was also cooking.
After a warm greeting, I first asked him whether he
was still smoking. “Quit a few days ago,” he answered. I
then asked him whether they were allowed to cook in the
ward. He told me that according to the chief nurse, cooking in the ward could set the hospital on fire, and therefore
it was forbidden, but everyone still did it. Eating in the
restaurant 3 times a day every day for the duration of his
stay would be too expensive, so cooking was the only affordable alternative.
On the way home, I thought of Mr. Liu, a brave albeit
uneducated man who survived so many challenges in life,
whose last, largest pleasure and perhaps his most effective
way of relieving stress, was the treasured freedom, however
self-destructive, to smoke.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C036
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: The Big Problem

One last arterial blood gas for a patient with possible
obesity hypoventilation syndrome and I would be
done for the day. I entered after a quick knock, not waiting
for a reply. "I need to do a blood test," I began. She took
her eyes off the TV and looked in my direction. I knew
that look—the one where the patient knows you are just an
intern and can be shooed away. She told me to come back
later. She wanted to finish eating a bag of candy.
I was annoyed at having to waste my time on someone
who clearly did not care about her health. I walked out.
Then it hit me: It's not her; it's me! She doesn't care
because she doesn't know. I do know, and yet I am standing
outside her door waiting for her to finish a bag of candy.
I knocked and walked back into her room. She looked
at me again, impatiently. I asked if I could talk to her
about her condition while she finished eating. I didn't
know how to start. I felt callous telling a patient that she
was obese. I hid behind medical jargon about hypoventilatiori. I don't think she understood anything. I left her with
her bag of candy.
It is so difficult to bring this up with an obese patient.
The inpatient admitted with uncontrolled diabetes or hypertension presents a perfect teaching opportunity, but
how do you tell someone you met 10 minutes ago that
they need to lose weight? Most people in our county hospital do not know the relationship between being overweight and diabetes or heart disease. How do you wrap up
a 15- to 30-minute interview session and tell the patient
that they need to lose weight without insulting them?
I found it much easier in the clinic after a relationship
had been established. But inpatients might not return to
clinic. You may never see them again, unless at a readmission. And then it will probably be a new team and the
same awkwardness, ultimately leading to the issue being
avoided—again.
I did a small study of 105 medical patients with a body
mass index of 30 kg/m'^ or more who were admitted for
uncontrolled diabetes or hypertension. I found that of the
approximately 75 patients who smoked, almost 95% were
getting some sort of counseling to quit smoking. However,
weight loss was being addressed in only 19%.
Asking a 65-year-old patient admitted for an unrelated
condition how much she smoked should be just as awkward. But it isn't. It isn't awkward for the patient or the
interviewer because it's routine. The patient knows to expect
the question, and the doctor knows that the patient knows.
But how do you ask the patient if they know they are . .. big?
Another barrier to this discussion is our own attitudes.
Studies about physician perceptions document that primary care physicians have negative attitudes toward their
obese patients and think of them as nonadherent and unengaged. We are convinced that we will not make a difference in these patients' behaviors and outcomes, even before
O N BEING A DOCTOR
we have tried. This is especially disturbing, because there is
evidence to suggest that patients who do receive weight loss
advice are more likely to attempt to lose weight than those
who do not receive such counseling.
I have made it routine to ask at the end of the review
of symptoms whether there has been any recent change in
weight. This is an innocuous enough question but brings up
the issue of weight and in some way can prepare the patient
for what follows. If the patient can recognize an increase in
weight, then the job is half done—at least there is awareness.
Most often, this is not the case. Then my next question is, "Aside from your (chief symptom), what concerns
you most about your health?" On occasion, the answer is
about a cancer that "runs in the family" or heart disease. In
that case, obesity can easily be woven in. However, the
most common response is, "Nothing. I am just worried
about (chief symptom)."
This is when I tell them that I would like to talk about
my concerns about their health. "I am concerned that you
may develop diabetes or hypertension or even have a stroke
in the near future. There are some risk factors that are not
modifiable, like age and family history. But smoking and
obesity are the two most important modifiable factors." It
is easier to state facts rather than opinions. The most common response is, "Oh! I have tried everything!" followed
by, "It runs in our family."
Even if the conversation does not go much further, at
least it has been mentioned, at least there has been some sort
of acknowledgment ofthe health hazards of being overweight,
by both the physician and the patient. This conversation may
not always take place during the first interview, but it can
definitely occur at some point before discharge.
The American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists recently declared obesity a disease state, recognizing
that it is not just a condition. It is the second leading cause
of preventable death in the United States, with an estimated $147 billion in associated medical costs per year.
I think that is a compelling enough reason for us to
start mentioning it in our problem lists and addressing it in
whatever way possible. It is important for patients to hear
it from all of us, at every visit. They need to be expecting it
at every encounter. Raising awareness is really the only tool
we have at the moment to confront this epidemic.
One of my patients thought that eating a bag of chips
after eating candy balances the sweet with the salt. This
was her idea of a balanced diet. I am sure she is not alone.
It's time we helped them.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C037
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: Married to Medicine

In the spring of 2010, my family prepared to move so that
my husband could begin a residency program in New
York City, about 250 miles from our home in Virginia.
My husband was excited. He'd matched at an excellent
hospital in Manhattan and was eager to begin his program.
I was apprehensive. I loved where we lived in Virginia
and was dreading leaving it behind. Nonetheless, on an
April day, I found myself with a real estate agent, looking
at places to rent just outside the city, in New Jersey. He'd
found one for us, a little house, right near the Hudson
River. He brought me down to the water's edge so that I
could see the view.
Along the river bank, jagged rocks lined the narrow
shore. The stones were muted shades of rusty gray and
hairy with dripping brown algae. Trash lay tangled between them, old bottles and plastic bags. The debris thudded rhythmically against the rocks as small waves washed
in over them. A quick breeze carried in the scents of brackish water—hints of brine, mud, and organic decay. The
only movement on the clouded surface of the river were
the riffles of competing currents. Otherwise, the wide
breadth of the Hudson was flat and empty. "Great view,
isn't it?" the realtor asked enthusiastically. I only nodded.
Directly across the water from us was the hospital where
my husband would soon be working.
Behind us, just out of sight, my husband was playing
with our 2-year-old daughter. "You can bring her down
here to feed the ducks in the summer," our real estate agent
said with a grin. But again, I could only nod. I turned away
a little and stared down the river at New York's skyline.
The Empire State Building was a sharp point against the
crisp, blue sky. The city's skyline was at once totally recognizable from movies and television shows I had seen. But
it was completely foreign to me as a place to call home.
The city's famous bustle, even invisible from here, felt utterly intimidating.
A sharp gust suddenly blew in off of the river, making
the waves rush in against the rocks. Across the water, an
American flag stretched and snapped in the wind on top of
one of the hospital buildings. I stared at the hospital, and
for a moment, tried to imagine all the doctors inside caring
for patients. But I failed. I myself was not a doctor.
The road to becoming a physician is a grueling one.
But in the end, doctors experience the reward of knowing
they have healed someone, or eased their pain. The family
members of physicians never experience such satisfaction.
Yet they still share in many of the sacrifices the medical
profession exacts from its doctors—including moving to
new and unfamiliar places. The nature of medical education, from the medical school application process to the
residency match program, is highly competitive. It often
requires young physicians to uproot themselves—and their
families—if they want to pursue training at the best possible hospitals and programs. In fact, this was our third
move to a new state since my husband began his medical
career. So many moves left me feeling as though I were
living an unsettled life, a life of constant change.
Overhead, two birds darted by, calling raucously.
Their bodies were a startling jewel green. "Those are our
wild parrots," the real estate agent explained to me. "Parrots?" I asked incredulously. "In New Jersey?" "Yep," he
said. "A crate of them supposedly burst open at JFK airport
back in the 60s, and they settled here." I watched the birds,
waylaid travelers who'd been misplaced so far from their
tropical origins. They had made their home here for decades, I realized, and they had thrived.
I followed the birds' flight until they disappeared into
some nearby trees to my left. Just up the river, the George
Washington Bridge stretched long and silver over the water. Cars flashed across it, their motion a constant flow into
the city that never slept. And for a moment. New York
City seemed not so intimidating as exhilarating.
Behind me, my daughter came running up. She
dashed past me and then paused near the edge of the water.
She bent, scooped up a handflil of gravel, and flung it into
the waves. Glee showed on her face at all the tiny splashes.
Our realtor turned to me again. "She's probably never been
so close to a river before," he said. "No," I admitted. "She
hasn't." And I smiled for the first time at the smile on her
face.
Near the river's edge, my husband knelt down beside
my daughter. Their heads bent toward each other as he
spoke to her in words I could not hear. He pointed to a
huge limb of driftwood, tangled in the rocks below. Together in the air, their fingers traced the twisting shape of
the aged wood. I watched them, freezing the moment in
my mind, a moment that I would never have experienced if
life, and medicine, had not brought us to this place.
Out on the river, the sun set a patch of the water
alight. It glowed so brilliantly, so beautifully white that it
hurt the eyes. And I felt acutely then that change was a
blade that could cut two ways. This was life: uncertainty
and sacrifice, thrill and fresh opportunity. "The river's
never the same," our real estate agent said then. "It's never
the same."
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C038
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: The Racist Patient

In my final months of residency, I was summoned to see
an angry patient. Mr. R. was furious that our pharmacy
did not stock his brand of insulin. He wanted to issue a
complaint.
“You guys always mess up my insulin whenever I am
here. I told the other doctor, and now I’m telling you. You
guys just can’t get it right.”
“I’m sorry,” I told him. “If you prefer, your family can
bring your insulin from home and our nurses can administer it. Would that be an acceptable solution?”
“You people are so incompetent.”
Uncertain of how I might best diffuse the situation, I
looked uncomfortably in the direction of my patient’s son,
who was seated at the bedside.
“You look at me when I talk to you,” Mr. R. commanded. “Don’t you look at him.”
“I’m sorry. Why don’t I come back later?”
As I uncomfortably walked out of the room, he
launched a grenade.
“Why don’t you go back to India!”
On pure instinct, I responded, “Why don’t you leave
our [expletive] hospital?” To underscore my point, I repeated myself.
I exited the room in a cold sweat.
Much of our clinical training focuses on how to modulate our personal style to accommodate patients. We take
doctoring courses that urge compassion, empathy, and cultural sensitivity. We undergo objective, structured clinical
examinations that certify our interpersonal skills. Our preceptors advise us on subtle techniques and gestures to ensure that patients feel safe, secure, and confident in our
care.
Yet, as I reflected on what happened that night, I realized that no one had ever raised the possibility that I
might one day be hurt by a patient’s words or actions.
What are our obligations when we are the subject of their
inhumanity, cruelty, or intolerance? When the patients
whom we are treating fail to express the same decency that
they demand?
The prevailing sentiment is that we are supposed to be
“better” than our patients. We are supposed to be able to
ignore unpleasant commentary, maintain aplomb, intellectualize difficult situations, and understand the roots of
their discontent. This view was reinforced by one of my
colleagues who was taking call with me that night. In his
eyes, I had clearly wronged, and I might consider apologizing to the patient.
“Don’t they teach us not to do that? You’re better than
that,” he scolded when I shared my story. “You have to
learn to ignore that stuff and rise above it.” He expressed
concern that the patient might report me to our hospital’s
patient relations committee and that I would be found
guilty of some kind of clinical misconduct.
Another colleague was ready to fast-forward through
my upset feelings and tried to make light of the fact that I,
indeed, had a forthcoming trip to my ancestral homeland.
“It is kind of funny, if you think of it that way.”
But the reality was that I was not above reacting to
Mr. R.’s contempt for me, nor did I feel like humor would
help me to move on from the situation. When Mr. R.
stopped seeing me as his physician or caregiver, but instead
as a foreign face, I was no longer a proud physician at the
hospital where I was training. Instead, I was reduced to a
passive subject of a xenophobe’s abuse. After years of feeling that my race was a nonissue, I was subjected to the
same kind of hurtful name-calling that I faced in childhood. Even as self-loathing for not having thicker skin
began to creep in, I decided that, on this occasion, my
feelings would count.
The following morning, I spoke to my supervising
attending physician and absolved myself of future interactions with Mr. R. He and the intern on service would sort
out the patient’s care without my input.
After rounding on our other patients that morning, I
left the hospital with a surprising new sense that, even as I
had chosen a profession that calls on me to serve, there
are clear limits to that service that I am unwilling to
compromise.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C039
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: Shirts and Skins

I walk into hospital rooms every day, but this time was
different. My father was in this particular hospital room,
trying to recover from total hip arthroplasty. As physicians,
my father and I both knew that surgery is never risk-free,
but neither of us anticipated this much postoperative
drama. I took a deep breath before entering, hoping to find
him in better spirits and without new complications.
Our welcome hug was difficult with his various wires
and tubes in the way. I had barely settled into the chair
when he shared the day’s epiphany with me. “I’ve divided
the physicians here into two teams,” my father informed
me as he squirmed uncomfortably in the hospital bed.
“The Shirts and the Skins. Like when you were in high
school—you remember.”
Truth be told, I sometimes had more trouble remembering my high school years than he did. But, yes, I did
play pick-up basketball occasionally, and we often divided
into two teams: one wearing shirts and one without
shirts—the “Skins.”
I struggled for a few moments to figure out what he
was talking about, and then quickly abandoned the attempt as futile. This was neither delirium nor dementia
speaking, merely my somewhat quirky father’s usual elliptical communication style. I knew that if I were patient, he
would explain further.
“You see, the Skins are the ones who actually place
their stethoscopes on my chest to listen and leave it there
long enough to hear more than one beat of my misbehaving heart. The Shirts, on the other hand, just allow the
stethoscope to graze my chest momentarily before resuming their examination of the cardiac monitor and computer
workstation by my bedside. Some of them don’t even place
the stethoscope directly on my skin but listen through my
hospital gown. Frankly, I’m afraid to wear a sweater, or
they’ll think my heart has ceased producing any sounds at all.”
Sadly, I am familiar with the behaviors he was describing. Cursory physical examinations are the norm now, and
auscultating the heart through a layer of clothing is simply
taking this to the next level. Once, out of curiosity, I tried
it myself. It turns out that you can hear the heart sounds
reasonably well through a thin shirt or hospital gown.
However, I’m not sure why one would want to try.
My father is a member of the group of patients whom
we physicians least enjoy caring for—a physician himself.
Not just any physician, but a well-educated, intelligent,
opinionated, and stubborn one (as if there is any other
kind). In his zeal to have his painful hip replaced, he
seemed to have conveniently downplayed his increasingly
frequent episodes of paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia. Now the episodes were occurring multiple times each
hour. Worrying even him. And me. He finally shared his
symptoms of frequent palpitations with his nurse, who
now joined in our collective anxiety. She paged the orthopedic resident, and, after a brief delay, he entered the
room.
The resident must have been in his late 20s but looked
a decade younger to me. “I hear you have been having
some rapid heartbeats. I asked the nurse to get an EKG and
put you on telemetry, and we are calling Cardiology. Let
me know if you need anything.” This resident was definitely a Shirt. No physical examination at all—perhaps he
wasn’t even playing in the game. My father pretty much
ignored him and listened to Bach on his MP3 player.
We waited. I was struck by how busy and fast-paced
the hospital seemed when I was the one making rounds,
and how impossibly slow-moving it seemed from the patient’s perspective. My father was feeling less philosophical
now that his Percocet was wearing off and was merely
grumpy. Honestly, I couldn’t blame him; I was feeling
rather grumpy myself, even without any postoperative pain
or tachyarrhythmias.
Finally, the cardiology fellow came by. He exchanged
a few brief words with my father, then examined the EKG
and cardiac monitor and, finally, briefly examined the
heart and lungs. Another Shirt, sadly. “How long have you
been having these episodes?” he asked my father.
My father’s response, “Forty years,” was both truthful
and designed to confuse and irritate the fellow, who happened to be playing for the wrong team. Yes, my father did
first develop rare bouts of paroxysmal supraventricular
tachycardia 40 years ago, but this certainly didn’t provide a
useful explanation of the recent change in their frequency
and persistence. Dad knew better, but couldn’t bring himself to really engage. Plus, his hip was hurting and his
Percocet was (yet again) inexplicably delayed.
The fellow finished his rather lackadaisical historytaking and examination and informed us, “The cardiology
consult attending, Dr. G., should be by shortly to see you.”
He then departed with little ceremony to begin his charting on the computer. Somehow, I had a feeling his note
would contain a lot of copied-and-pasted information, but
perhaps I was merely feeling a bit peckish myself.
Dr. G. arrived soon thereafter. He was only a few years
younger than my father and probably near retirement. His
seniority seemed to relax my father, as did his focus on the
man in the bed rather than the monitor overhead. When
the examination came, I knew what to expect. Yep, definitely a Skin. And not just a quick once-over. He actually
placed his hand on my father’s chest to palpate, then listened in the correct spots. And listened. It seemed as
though he was moving in slow motion, although the whole
examination probably took less than 90 seconds.
As they spoke, I saw my father relax and open up.
Adept in the structure of medical histories, he provided an
organized, coherent, and comprehensive summary of his
symptoms and how they developed over time. After reviewof the EKG, a discussion ensued about treatment options.
Dr. G. answered our numerous questions about risks, benefits, and alternatives and rendered a decision. An ablation
would be scheduled to destroy the offending pathways,
while hopefully leaving the normal ones uninjured.
The electrophysiology physician barely met my father,
relying on his fellow to obtain consent and make the necessary preparations. The next day, the ablation was performed. The electrophysiology physician—another Shirt
by any reckoning—performed his technical magic with elegance and precision. Although never performing a thorough cardiac examination, he cured my father’s heart from
the inside. Score one for the Shirts!
After another interminable day in the hospital, Dad
finally returned home. He was well-treated, perhaps, but
didn’t feel as though he had been treated well. Still, I
suppose the outcome is what counts, and all’s well that
ends well.
I must sound like an old-timer, lamenting the good old days of medicine, when physicians listened to theirpatients, and the laying-on of hands was paramount. I am
reminded of the joke told when I was a resident, of the
good-old days when medicine was an art, and the patients
died. There is much in medicine’s advances to bring credit
to our profession, and there is no quibbling with cures.
Still, it seems that it wouldn’t take that much effort to have
a few of the Shirts strip down a bit and join the other team.
At least it would even up the teams and give the Skins a
fighting chance.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C040
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: Don’t Read This Article

Today’s deluge of research studies seems to have created
a secondary cottage industry for physicians to demonstrate their erudition. How better to show off your tony
acumen than by quoting a recent study? But does anyone
actually read all of the studies relevant to his or her practice? And perhaps more important, does the average clinician really need to? In his work, How to Talk About Books
You Haven’t Read, Pierre Bayard (a literature professor!)
extols the virtues and values of not reading books (at least I
think that’s what he has done, having only really read the
book jacket). As justification for my own couch potato
practices, I feel compelled to use and extend Bayard’s argument to the realm of clinical medicine. Below is my
guide to, and defense of, talking about articles you haven’t
read.
Step 1. Don’t feel guilty about it! About reading, Bayard argues, “For there is necessarily a choice to be made,
given the number of books in existence, between the overall view and each individual book, and all reading is a
squandering of energy in the difficult and time-consuming
attempt to master the whole.” I agree, and I choose to
expend my energy on a comprehensive understanding of
the literature rather than in-depth knowledge of a few
studies. Evidence-based medicine purists would have us
believe that we should be critically appraising the primary
literature ourselves on a regular basis instead of relying on
expert opinion. Don’t listen to them. Know in your heart
that the body of literature is far too big for you to read
everything, and that in-depth study of only select articles
may prejudice you against all of the other important
studies you don’t have time to read. You’ll also seem
more like a polymath if you have breadth rather than
depth.
Step 2. Unabashedly read someone else’s summary.
You’re going to need to know something about the papers
you haven’t really read, so just skim through your subscription of JournalWatch, ACP Journal Club, or the accompanying editorial on the article. Consider increasing the passivity index by simply listening to journal-based podcasts
and Webcasts. If you can go through several different short
summaries of an article, you can better align “your” opinion with the safe mainstream consensus. Bayard posits,
“Besides actually reading a book, there is, after all, another
way to develop quite a clear sense of its contents: We can
read or listen to what others write or say about it....
Many of the books we are led to talk about, and which
have, in certain cases, played important roles in our lives,
have never actually passed through our hands (although we
may sometimes be convinced of the contrary).” If you read
the summary well enough, it will feel like you yourself have
critically appraised the paper.
Step 3. Remember in which journal the study was published, what kind of study it was, and the reviewer’s overall
opinion. In polite company, it should be sufficient to say,
“Well, JAMA had published that retrospective study showing a reasonable risk reduction in mortality but, of course,
it was just a retrospective study.” Or, “I know that metaanalysis in Annals didn’t find many primary trials, but it
really didn’t seem to show any difference between the two
treatments.” Citing the journal source makes it seem as
though you regularly read your subscriptions, akin to
showing others you keep up with issues of The New Yorker
or The Economist. Most of your colleagues should be suitably impressed, even if they have fully read the articles
themselves. That’s because they’re not likely to remember
more than a few snippets anyway. As Bayard contends,
“What we preserve of the books we read . . . is in truth no
more than a few fragments afloat, like so many islands, on
an ocean of oblivion.”
Step 4. Be confident when talking about the article you
have not read. Bayard claims, “Though Vale´ry did not read
much, this did not prevent him from having precise opinions on the authors about whom he knew so little, and
discussing these authors at length.” I will wager that most
studies people cite are those they have heard of, skimmed,
or largely forgotten. I remember how awe-inspiring it was
when my superiors quoted trial sizes and likelihood ratios . . . until I realized how often their quotations were
really quite off. What they were actually remembering was
the general gist of the papers. They fleshed out the articles
with vaguely recollected but confidently stated numbers
that no one else could really question. You, too, can expound pontifically and loudly: “I really think this was a
great study overall, and it will really change my practice.”
Or, “I just don’t believe those results. It wasn’t a very good
study.” Or you could try some generic stock phrases: “Obviously, a proper randomized trial is needed, but will
be difficult to do.” “I think more research is needed
to confirm the results.” “It still leaves us wondering
about the potential benefits to more specific patient subgroups.”
Step 5. If things are backfiring, don’t panic. In the rare
scenario that you are talking to people about an article they
truly know in depth and they start intelligently challenging
you, turn the situation into an opportunity to flatter them
by asking their opinion: “Well, you certainly read this paper in detail. May I ask, did you ultimately feel there was
any real fatal flaw?” We all like to think we’re smart and
our insights are highly sought after. Alternatively, one
could try the riskier but potentially more satisfying strategy
of one-upmanship by asking your colleague’s opinion on a
very recent, somewhat related study of which you only just
scanned the title: “So, what did you think of that
recent study X in the New England?” If she has read that
too, well, it’s best to just desist in the presence of a true
masterDon’t forget—you’re in good company should you
choose to follow this guide. Oscar Wilde himself classically
argued that book critics need not read the entire work they
are reviewing: “It must be perfectly easy in half an hour to
say whether a book is worth anything or worth nothing.
Ten minutes are really sufficient, if one has the instinct for
form.” So go ahead, just thumb through those papers, and
impress your colleagues by talking about that article you
haven’t really read!
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C041
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: The Gravedigger

I go to my patients’ funerals whenever possible. It is a way
of showing respect for the patient and the patient’s family. Depending on the denomination, a funeral also provides me with 1-, 2-, or 3-hour periods to sit and think.
My funeral thoughts relate to the big issues of life and
death, and I come away with a feeling of peace and of
being part of a community.
Nothing in these funeral-going experiences prepared
me for gravedigging, however. Digging a grave is like a
funeral, raised to the tenth power.
The call came at about 2:00 a.m. on a Thursday
morning. My friends had just found their son, who had
hanged himself. He was my godson. I flew out to be with
them later that morning.
They live on 100 acres of very rough, isolated land in
northern New Mexico. It takes a high clearance, fourwheel drive vehicle to navigate the 3-mile track from the
paved road to their house. All of the eight or so families
who live along that track are off the grid. Electricity comes
from solar panels and wind, water comes from wells or
rainwater, and heating comes from wood stoves. Toilets
tend to be primitive.
Communities come together in crisis, and the small
community along that 3-mile dirt track was no exception.
Tony’s mother wanted him buried on the land. Someone
had a niece who worked at a funeral home, and she arranged the permits. Someone else was a woodworker, so he
constructed a beautiful cherrywood coffin. People flocked
to the house, bringing food and liquor. But there was very
little conversation. It was so overwhelmingly sad, and so
confusing.
When a person commits suicide, those who remain
have a lot of forgiving to do. First, we have to forgive
ourselves. There is always something we think we could
have said, something we could have done that would
have prevented it from happening. Tony called me
about 6 weeks before he died and left a mumbled message on my answering machine. I hadn’t called back. In
my life certain unwise acts and failures to act have become lodged in my brain. The occasional and unpredictable dislodging of one of those memories precipitates waves of shame. Not returning Tony’s phone call
was a good candidate for that list.
Second, we have to forgive each other. The temptation to blame increases with the senselessness of the
tragedy. Tony’s parents should have been more firm.
His high school friends were destructive. His girlfriend
was rejecting. The police and judicial system were biased against mixed-race young men. We can mix and
match from a long list of perpetrators, allowing us to
resurrect old biases and resentments in a fresh setting.
Not a helpful activity, but highly prevalent among
humans.
Finally, we have to forgive Tony. Tony had been a
bright, good-looking child. However, my discomfort
with him started when he was seven. Unconditional love
is not one of my strengths. Tony was interested in appearing clever, and seemed deficient in feelings for others. I gave up on him when he was 20—a high school
dropout and contemptuous of his parents. By age 22, he
had fathered a child and spent 6 months in the county
jail for armed robbery. His final act was to come home
to hang himself during his first visit in many months.
There was a lot of forgiving to do, but no forgiveness
was happening in the house. Nothing was happening except sadness. The atmosphere was claustrophobic. If I were
prone to anxiety attacks, I would have had one. Several
others did, in various forms.
The task of digging the grave fell to Tony’s father
and me. Tony’s mother picked the spot—a peaceful
indentation of land a few hundred yards from the
house with a view of the Sangre de Cristo and Jemez
Mountains.
The first 6 inches were soft dirt, followed by a foot of
increasingly compacted clay. Then we hit rock. The rock
would splinter beneath the pick for a few inches, so we got
through another half foot in an hour. Then the rock got
harder and the pick began to bounce at every hit, along
with the sledgehammer and assorted other tools. When the
pick hit the rock, our bodies rebounded and vibrated in
unpleasant ways. But we kept at it, mindlessly pounding
the rock. At about the hundredth swing, his father
growled. “F____ing Tony!”
I started laughing, and we both sat down and laughed
for the next half-hour straight, sputtering out curses. Then
we started back on the digging. Rather than think and
recalculate and plan how to deal with the rock, we kept
banging away. It was ultimate guy stupidity—there must
have been a better way. On the other hand, it was so much
better than sitting in the house. The work, the sweat, the
jangled joints—all of it was a form of penance. And somehow we began to talk, to piece together what we thought,
how we felt about Tony. The words flowed. We cursed
Tony. We cursed ourselves. Amidst all that conversation,
forgiveness began.
We finished the grave, my friend and I. It took us
about 12 hours over 3 days. In the end, we broke down
and borrowed a jackhammer. Over that time, we talked a
lot. By the end we had done our forgiving. The sheer
painful difficulty of the task—digging into stone—was sufficient penance for us to start forgiving ourselves, and each
other.
And at some point, banging the pick off the rock, I
realized that Tony had done the best he could. Life is
tenuous. It is much harder for some of us than for others.
He did the best he could.Perhaps we had all done the best we could.
We dug the requisite 6 feet (maybe 5 and a half). The
very act of showing up and digging became a metaphor for
the two of us, I think. Life will go on.
The burial was a week later. In the morning, they
brought the casket up from town. Tony’s father and I
stared at its handles, which added about 4 inches to its
width. I spent the 3 hours before the ceremony back at the
grave—digging in my funeral suit.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C042
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: The Power of a Legend

Boston, May 1995. The last days of my clinical fellowship were like a heavily loaded lorry driving up a steep
hill. I was emotionally exhausted and physically drained—
one needed a lot of moonlighting to survive in Boston. I
was also preoccupied with thoughts of my research transition into the high-power genetics lab.
Shaun was sad and angry. He had leukemia and aspergillosis. Only 14 years old, Shaun had no visitors. As the
days passed, he slipped more and more into a depressive
defiance of his caregivers. I felt sorry for Shaun but found
little time for him as I struggled to get through my busy
day—a Sisyphean task of endless consults, follow-ups,
sign-offs, and more consults. But one day, I lingered at
Shaun’s bedside. I had seen his eyes wet and asked him
why he was so down on that particular day.
He said simply, “Doc, nothing’s going well in my life,
and to top off everything, the Bruins lost last night.” This
was a thread for communication between a sick teenager
and a busy clinician.
“Are you a Bruins fan?” I asked.
“Big time,” he replied. “I miss the days when I went to
the games with my friends.”
A flash of an idea came to my mind.
“So, Shaun, if I bring you a big Bruins player, will that
cheer you up?”
“Oh yeah, who are you going to bring me? Bobby
Orr?” he said sarcastically.
Who’s Bobby Orr? I thought to myself. My European
upbringing and lack of knowledge about ice hockey made
me appear alien when I asked that question to the secretary
in the infectious diseases department.
“What’s wrong with you?” she replied with her heavy
Boston accent—almost as heavy as my Greek one. “You don’t
know about Bobby Orr? He’s a legend here in Boston.”
“Well, find his number for me, please,” I asked.
But, when I called him, he was in Canada. I left a
message with his secretary explaining the situation and my
request.Three weeks passed. I had forgotten all about Bobby
Orr. Shaun remained hospitalized, as depressed as ever.
It was around noon on Memorial Day weekend, I
remember. I was on call and very busy when I received an
outside number on my beeper. I called back.
“Doc, this is Bobby Orr. Sorry I am late getting back
to you, but I was out of the country. How can I help you?”
I was stunned and pleasantly surprised. I started explaining
Shaun’s situation with increasing excitement.
“Doc,” he said. “You talk too much. Tell me where
Shaun is, and I’ll be there in an hour.” Shaun was scheduled to have a CT done on that day, but he had refused it.
He lay in bed curled up, disheveled. I canceled the CT and
asked the nurses to ready him for a surprise visitor.
Bobby Orr came in, loaded with posters of the Bruins.
The nurses’ station buzzed, and I began to sense just how
great a legend this man was. Bobby stayed with Shaun for
over an hour, one on one, on that Memorial Day weekend
afternoon. They talked and shared stories about hockey.
Shaun was the happiest that I had ever seen him—all big
smiles, living a dream. I was incredibly moved. Eyes wet, I
proceeded to thank Bobby Orr. He looked like a battled,
proven warrior, scarred and tough.
“Thank you, Mr. Orr. I will never forget what you did
today for that kid.”
“No. Thank you, Doc.” His eyes were also wet.
Shaun died a month later of relapsed leukemia. I
moved on with my career, pursuing my profession while
also trying to keep up with a busy family life. I never saw
Bobby Orr again, but I’ll never forget the great generosity
of this legend and the immense effect he had on Shaun’s
life—and mine.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C043
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: A Little Hyponatremic

My mother died when I was 12. I didn’t see much of
her that last summer; I was away at camp for the
first time and came home to the news that she was scheduled for gallbladder surgery. Hospital policy in 1963 was
that children under 12 were not allowed to visit. My
mother left for the hospital, my father carrying her bag as
she kissed my brother, sister, and me, and promised to be
home soon. I never saw her again.
The surgery went well, but the following day she was
nauseated, with a headache. She was given promethazine,
and by the end of the day, she was dead. Information was
sparse. She was ok, then a sudden deterioration, surrounded by specialists powerless in the face of the nameless
havoc that took her life. I was eventually told that she had
an allergic reaction to promethazine, her brain was gravely
injured, and she died. That was it. There was no one to ask
questions. My father—an erudite man who carried a poetry book across the Pacific, the captain of a tanker during
World War II—sat alone in the dark, silent, night after
night, for months.
All traces of my mother were removed from the house
not long after she died. Her clothes, shoes, everything was
taken away. Her photographs vanished. Any evidence she
had existed was gone, except for one thing: her silver service. A beautiful, simple set of sterling silver, engraved with
her initials, stored in a stolid mahogany chest in our dining
room. Every night, for years, I awakened, terrified, in the
middle of the night to the sound of burglars, rustling
through her silver, stealing it. Unlike my mother, the silver
was always there in the morning.
Once I had a mother—a beautiful, blue-eyed, tender
mother, who sat in the kitchen with me after school, over
cookies and milk, asking me about my day. And then one
day, I didn’t.
In the 20 years between my parents’ deaths, I was able
to get only one piece of information from my father about
her last days: The day before her hospital admission, they
played golf. He was a scratch golfer, but his buddies canceled their regular game at the last minute. He and my
mother played instead. She was a terrible golfer, he told
me, laughing, remembering. They had so much fun. He
regained his practiced stony stoicism, as he told me that
after her death, he never picked up his clubs again. A child
with one parent lives in fear of that parent dying, too; I
couldn’t risk my father’s safety by asking questions that he
was too brokenhearted to answer. Those questions led me
into medicine.
Emboldened by medical school, I asked questions. I
called one of the physicians who had been with her the
night she died. He was an old family friend, and had
been chief of medicine at the hospital. She died of cerebral edema, herniating her brainstem; he believed that
it was an idiosyncratic reaction to promethazine. Two
other young women in our community had similarly
catastrophic outcomes, also after elective surgery and
promethazine. One of them died; the other fell into a
coma. Our family friend wrote up my mother’s case for
publication, but it was rejected, he told me, because she
was a little hyponatremic, a confounding variable. I
looked promethazine up and found that one in one million persons died after taking it. None of it made sense,
but I was out of clues, and that’s where I left it—a
mystery. Then I continued my training.
Losing a parent in childhood isn’t just the loss of the
parent you knew; it’s also the melancholy vacuum of the
future you might have had. No more milk and cookies
after school, no calls to mom to tell her I got into medical
school, or got engaged, or that she was going to be a grandmother. This was the measure that choreographed my life,
and at the core of it, always the insistent question: What
happened?
I wouldn’t find out for over 40 years, and it was a
patient who led me to the answer.
Two, actually. About one a year ago, I was asked to
see two patients, both of whom had become hyponatremic on SSRIs. The male patient, at 52 and with a sodium level of 114 after 1 week on SSRIs, had been
barely symptomatic, compared with the 60-year-old female patient who had a sodium level of 118 and developed hyponatremia over a longer period. Both required
hospitalization, but only the female patient had overt
signs of cerebral edema; she was confused, with a ferocious headache, lethargic, and vomiting. The male patient was anxious, unfocused, and anorexic, with insomnia. Twenty years in private practice, and not a single
symptomatic hyponatremic patient, and now two within
a few months. Strange.
Curious, I burrowed into the literature. Why wasn’t
hyponatremia following the rules of logic? Shouldn’t symptoms be dictated by absolute sodium values? Wouldn’t a
patient who developed hyponatremia over a shorter
period—especially a patient with lower sodium levels—be
more symptomatic than the patient with more time to
adapt?
As I read about the gender differences in response to
hyponatremia—women are more likely than men to have
catastrophic outcomes—I began to think about my
mother. As I thought about her, a story began to take
shape. Maybe promethazine was a red herring. What if she
had been hyponatremic but it was mistaken for the nausea
and headache that sometimes accompanies surgery and anesthesia? Promethazine might have masked symptoms, but
by itself was an unlikely suspect. I was convinced that hyponatremia was the killer. But she was only a little hyponatremic. How could a little hyponatremia cause such a devastating brain injury?An engine, idling for years, began to rev as I searched
in earnest for my mother’s killer. I ordered her death certificate, and while I waited for its arrival, I poured through
literature on postoperative hyponatremia. I found my answer in an article published in Annals of Internal Medicine
in 1992—“Postoperative Hyponatremic Encephalopathy
in Menstruant Women” (1). Menstruant women with
postoperative hyponatremia were at risk for catastrophic
outcomes, permanent brain damage, and death, even with
less than alarming sodium levels. There it was. A little
hyponatremic.
And the death certificate: cerebral edema, with cerebellar tonsillar infarction, focal subarachnoid hemorrhage,
of undetermined cause. I saw my father’s familiar handwriting and felt the crush of devastation in his firm
signature.
I finally understood what happened and also realized
that her physicians had no way of knowing what was unfolding. It couldn’t be the sodium; she was only a little
hyponatremic. I imagined them, frantic to save her, ordering tests, trying to stop what must have become a rapid
and bewildering progression of alarming signs.
They had no way of understanding, but we do. Young
women are still at risk, whether from postoperative hyponatremia, or exercise-induced hyponatremia, or acute hyponatremia from any source. Hyponatremia may not follow the rules of logic when it comes to gender, but
physicians are propelled by logic. And there is evidence—
solid data—that a little hyponatremia can be a very dangerous thing for women.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C044
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: The Name of a Champion

In my second year of medical school, I entered a neuroscience lecture one September day as the New York Yankees were heading into the World Series. A list of numbers
on the chalkboard was arranged in 4 columns that we began to copy down without knowing why, as is often the
tradition in medical school. Our professor entered the
room, lowered the projector screen in front of the numbers, and turned on the image of a smiling face wearing a
Yankees baseball cap. The face was quickly recognizable to
some. His name was known to us all. Over the next hour,
we heard the poignant story of a man whose name had
become synonymous with one of the most devastating and
feared neurologic illnesses, yet whose most well-known
words are that he considers himself “the luckiest man on
the face of this earth.” The numbers on the chalkboard
were baseball statistics: batting averages, runs batted in,
and home runs that spoke of a relentless motor neuron
disease that decimated one man’s strength but could not
weaken the eyes, the mind, and the heart of an athlete.
Even when he could no longer hit the ball out of the park,
like all champions, he performed best when his team
needed him and his batting averages and runs batted in
remained higher when there were men on the bases. Lou
Gehrig, the Iron Horse, became one of the few patients
who would give his name to his disease.
Five years later, in my second year as a neurology resident, I found myself remembering this lesson as I faced
one of the most difficult tasks in our profession. I had first
met Mr. M. in a Gait and Balance Clinic at the Gainesville
Veterans Affairs 3 months earlier. He was referred for a
history of falls and progressive weakness in the right leg
over the past 8 months. Looking at his thin and atrophied
right thigh and the rippling muscle fibers over the calf, I
was humbled and could barely speak when he asked me
what I thought. I knew this could be only one thing, but I
still couldn’t fully believe it. Although he had fasciculations
in both arms and legs, the weakness seemed to be only in 1
leg. Maybe it will turn out to be something else, I told myself.
I told the patient that we needed to do some more tests
and after that, we would talk about what is happening. Mr.
M. shook my hand and told me that he was grateful for all
of the care he received from the doctors at Veterans Affairs,
and he asked me to call him by his first name. We arranged
for the patient to get a motorized scooter and a homesafety assessment, and scheduled electromyography and
nerve-conduction studies.
Shortly after the tests confirmed the diagnosis of
motor neuron disease, Mr. M. was hospitalized for heart
palpitations and found to have 3-vessel coronary artery disease. I saw him shortly after he was discharged from the
hospital. He arrived in the motorized scooter, and his wife,
daughter-in-law, and grandson joined us in the examination room. We talked, and they told me that he had been
coughing when he ate, his voice had become softer, and he
had developed increased weakness in the right leg. On examination, he had developed atrophy in the intrinsic hand
muscles, had weakness of dorsiflexion with the left foot,
and was barely able to lift the right leg against gravity.
Pulmonary function tests done during the recent hospitalization showed evidence of an extrinsic restrictive ventilatory defect. It was time to tell the family what they came to
hear, and again, I could barely speak and forgot everything
I was planning to say. “Do you like baseball? Do you remember Lou Gehrig?” I asked. He replied, “He was a little
before my time . . . .” I could not put this off any longer,
“The tests have returned, they suggest that you have Lou
Gehrig’s disease.” We talked about the disease prognosis
and made plans for where we would go from there.
In just over 2 years of residency, I have met hundreds
of people, many of them going through the most difficult
of times, sometimes people who are spending their lives
recovering from events in their past. For Mr. M., finding
out that he has Lou Gehrig disease must have been one of
the most frightening and heartbreaking experiences he
would ever have, even if he already suspected it. At that
moment, I understood why it is so important and unique
for a disease, especially amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, to be
named not for the scientist who discovered it, but for a
patient who faced it with strength and equanimity. I must
do everything I can to help Mr. M. and all my other
patients so that they can do the same. This is the bottom of
the ninth, the bases are loaded, and even if we cannot hit
the ball out of the park, we have to try to be champions.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C045
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: My Battle Against Gonorrhea

The familiar white urinals, puce-colored walls, and the
queasy odor of disinfectant in M207—the men’s
room on the mezzanine floor of the University of Pittsburgh’s medical school. I remember standing in a ragged
line of seven young men across from the toilet stalls,
pants stripped to my ankles. This was the moment, the
crux of the clinical trial, the procedure that had
seemed so trivial a few weeks earlier when I had agreed
to participate.
Two men wearing long lab coats busied themselves
arranging a sequence of labeled catheters on a metal cart
near the sinks. The short one looked like a Marine drill
sergeant; the other, older one reminded me of Marcus
Welby, television’s kindly general practitioner. But this
time Welby wasn’t curing the sick. He snapped on a pair of
latex gloves as the drill sergeant turned toward me and the
other half-naked subjects and barked, “Okay, gentlemen,
we’re ready to inoculate.”
I looked from side to side. My colleagues’ faces were
mostly indeterminate. One guy, a graduate student from
some department across the campus managed a macho
smile. My pediatrician friend had turned green. I told
myself there was absolutely nothing to be afraid of—a
sharp stab in the urethra, yes, but no danger, no side
effects, and, best of all, a walloping reward. One thousand dollars! For a newly minted junior faculty member
in 1975, this amount was nothing short of miraculous.
My participation in the experiment had begun when
my department chairman, Ken Rogers, invited me one
morning to meet with his colleague, Charlie Brinton,
whom I remembered as a fatherly but somewhat boring
microbiology lecturer. Dr. Brinton was actually a top-notch scientist who had discovered that protein filaments
called pili, which cover Neisseria gonorrhea’s cell wall, are
responsible for attaching the organism to human mucosal
cells. The pili also inhibit leukocytes’ ability to ingest the
bacterium, thus contributing to its pathogenicity. Moreover, Brinton’s laboratory had recently created an antipilus
vaccine that produced significant antibody responses in
rats, as well as in two human volunteers. In the grand
tradition of medical self-experimentation, the two volunteers were Brinton himself and my boss, who was an old
hand at vaccine trials, having worked on polio with Dr.
Jonas Salk at the old Municipal Hospital for Contagious
Diseases.
The Army had awarded Dr. Brinton a contract to
pursue further work on his vaccine. This was a highpriority project for the military. Gonorrhea infected
many thousands of personnel every year and lowered
their productivity and morale. An effective N. gonorrhea
vaccine had the potential to prevent all that if given to
recruits during basic training. The next step was for
Brinton and his coworkers to embark on a small pilot
study of vaccine efficacy in healthy adult men, which
was precisely where I came in—they needed a seventh
and final subject.
The protocol was straightforward. Each volunteer
would first receive a parenteral vaccine injection. The
subjects’ antibody responses would then be monitored
over the ensuing several weeks. The project definitely
did not involve going out and contracting gonorrhea in
the traditional way. Rather, each subject would be given
an intraurethral inoculation. Four subjects were randomly assigned to receive a pathogenic dose of Neisseria
gonorrhea; the other three, a saline solution. Subjects
would keep track of symptoms, if any, and undergo a
daily examination. Subjects who became ill with gonorrhea would be treated immediately; their nonsymptomatic colleagues would receive antibiotics at the end of
the study as a cautionary measure. The inducement was
a check for $1000.
This sounded like the key to a new car to me.
We had been nursing along our romantic but utterly undependable Jeep Cherokee for weeks. We desperately needed a new family car. Having recently arrived in Pittsburgh with two small children and two
mortgages—our house in North Carolina was still on
the market—we had only one salary of $26,000 per
year.
“Gonorrhea!” My wife exploded later that night when
I described the study to her. “You must be out of your
mind!”
“No,” I assured her. “This makes a lot of sense. It’ll
prove I’m a team player. What will Ken and the others
say if I turn it down? They’ll think I’m not committed.”
“But isn’t it dangerous?” she asked.
“Absolutely not,” I insisted. “If I develop an infection,
they’ll give me penicillin right away. You, too. There’ll be
no problem. Really, it’s perfectly safe.”
In the end we agreed that I’d sleep on the sofa until
the study was safely over.
I don’t remember the consent form, but it was certainly a far cry from today’s complex and highly regulated
legal documents. In the mid-1970s, the modern era of
ethics in human research had hardly begun. As a result of
public outrage over revelations about the Tuskegee Syphilis
Study, Congress had passed the National Research Act in
1974, which authorized the creation of a National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects in Biomedical and Behavioral Research. Ethical requirements for human research, including informed consent procedures and
evaluation by institutional review boards, would not be
fully established until several years later when the Commission issued its final recommendations, in the Belmont Report, in 1979.
I cleaned out some boxes not long ago that had
remained unmolested in the basement since we moved
into the house in 1991. Several of them contained files
from my office in Pittsburgh, among which was an accordion folder labeled “GC Vaccine.” The folder included mimeographed sheets that summarized the protocol; a crude drawing of a gonococcus with hair-like
projections sticking out in every direction; a tattered
article from Chemical Abstracts; and a brief story from
the Pittsburgh Press dated April 28, 1975. The story
indicated that Dr. Charles Brinton and his colleagues at
the University of Pittsburgh had developed a vaccine
against gonorrhea, a potential breakthrough that would
undergo “intensive testing” in the very near future.
If the folder once contained additional material, it had
long since been filed away in a wastebasket, leaving only a
series of questions and ambiguities. Given today’s standards, could my participation be considered voluntary? Or
was there coercion involved? The stipend certainly influenced my decision, but I suspect my desire to impress the
boss and be accepted by colleagues played as great a role, or
greater, because I realize how emotionally difficult it would
have been to say “no.” I’m sure Dr. Rogers viewed my
participation as entirely voluntary and would have been
offended by the idea that our relationship might change if
I declined.
How about disclosure of relevant information? I remember very little disclosure, as such. Of course, the
investigators assumed that I knew the score. I had plenty
of experience treating patients with gonorrhea. But what
about privacy and confidentiality? What if there were
complications? Who was responsible for providing
follow-up medical care, if needed? Considering the time
lag, the most interesting questions were obvious: What
ever happened to that medical breakthrough? Where is
the vaccine?
The traumatic event in the men’s room lasted only a
moment. I remember how grateful I felt when Charlie
Brinton handed me a slip of paper with follow-up instructions before I opened the door and stepped—presumably
with pants in place—across the hall and into my office. I
spent the next few days in something like a caffeine jag. A
twitch here, a burning there. A state of jangled alertness.
Exhausted, but unable to sleep.
But nothing happened; the same with the two other
guys in our department. I wondered, What about the graduate students? What about the research assistant from
Charlie Brinton’s laboratory? I didn’t know any of them,
and it felt a bit awkward to phone and ask, “By the way, do
you have any urethral discharge?” Nobody was talking, but
it was a double-blind study after all, so we’d just have to
wait until some designated point when everything would
be revealed. We waited. A week passed; the check arrived.
I went to clinic. A triumphant announcement surely must
be just around the corner. Two weeks. Nothing happened.
When I finally asked Ken Rogers about the results, he
suggested I talk to Charlie Brinton, who sounded unusually distracted and said, “Yes, you’re right. We’ll have to
get everyone together.”
As far as I know, that meeting never took place, but
Ken Rogers called me into his office one day. As usual, he
sat at one end of his plasticized sofa that was otherwise
stacked with papers and books. He looked up, leaned forward, hands clasped over his knee, and announced in his
drill sergeant voice, “Coulehan, this (blank) thing is a
(blank-blank) mess.”
So that was it. An inexplicable technical failure. Somehow the organisms in our N. gonorrhoea inoculations had
died off, or the preparations were too diluted to initiate
clinical infection. When the laboratory folks attempted to
verify bacterial concentration by plating residual effusion
on culture media, few colonies had grown. Dr. Rogers
didn’t know the exact nature of the error, or how it had
occurred. Worse yet, our antibody responses had been mediocre and far less impressive than Brinton had anticipated
from earlier studies, which, except for the two senior researchers, were done entirely on rats. Leave it to humans to
screw up a good theory.
What a washout!
Many developments in medicine have occurred over
the 35 years since that fateful day in the medical school
men’s room. One development that did not occur was the
creation of an effective vaccine for gonorrhea. What happened? Discovering that old accordion folder led me to
spend a few minutes doing a literature search that probably
would have taken days in 1975. Interest in pilus peptide–
based vaccines continued for a while, and one such vaccine
even progressed to the stage of a large clinical trial conducted in Korea among Army personnel. The results of
that study were published in 1991 and showed unequivocally that the vaccine didn’t prevent naturally acquired
gonorrhea, but it did stimulate considerable antibody response. It turned out that the problem was that pilus peptides have innumerable antigenic variants that frequently
mutate from one form to another—a bait-and-switch
game. Although gonococcal pili initially appeared to be
ideal vaccine antigens, in reality they are unpredictable,
moving targets.
My “GC Vaccine” folder raises a number of other
difficult questions—questions about hope, enthusiasm,
ethics, and romance. Why did I participate in the study? I
was excited about the idea of playing a role in the development of an important new vaccine. But I’m sure the
biggest motivators were the easy money and my sense of
duty as a member of the department. Would I do it again
under these circumstances? I suppose so. I don’t recall having any serious ethical questions, only emotional ones. Yet,
in retrospect, it’s obvious that the circumstances were unethical. The investigators created a coercive situation by
selecting subjects from among junior faculty, students, and
laboratory personnel, and paying such a large stipend.
They didn’t intend to do so, but the effect was inevitableLikewise, the unstructured consent process with its lack of
defined commitments and responsibilities was not “informed.” We were treated like junior partners who should
trust their seniors, rather than subjects with explicit, enforceable rights.
Do I regret my role in the battle against gonorrhea? Of
course not. It’s an interesting memory, a good story, and
there’s also the stub from the University of Pittsburgh that
documents a check for $1000—no strings attached.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C046
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: A Lot to Ask

Jane was 39 years old but didn’t look it. Her face was
round from steroids, and wispy patches of fine hair
clung to her mostly bald scalp. She topped this off with a
pair of severe-looking reading glasses that gave visitors the
impression of a professorial infant. Her tracheostomy prevented her from speaking, and her bed was surrounded by
notebooks, pens, and the odd scraps of paper that she used
when communicating with the rest of the world. Any visitor who used any of the above information to assume that
Jane was not intelligent, educated, and well-spoken was in
for a dirty look and a quick dismissal from the hospital
room.
Having spent almost a quarter of her life with lymphoma, Jane was familiar with the hospital system, with
good news and bad, the indignities of being washed by
someone you’ve just met, and the frustration of having to
get a doctor’s permission to take Tylenol—when in your
own home, you would sensibly walk to the medicine cabinet and get it yourself. The fact that she was now admitted
to the hospital with respiratory failure because the lymphoma had metastasized through her lung tissue did not
faze her. As she told me quite clearly, “I’ll be fine.”
I learned a lot more about Jane in the next few days.
She confessed to me that she had known all along that she
was dying but had so many things to do before she died.
She worshipped her 9-year-old daughter, Emilia, but because the cancer was present for most of Emilia’s life, she
had been raised primarily by her aunt and grandmother.
Jane hoped she would be there for Emilia’s wedding but
knew she wouldn’t be. She tried to write letters for Emilia
to open on her graduation and wedding days, but she was
too tired and couldn’t. I offered to scribe for her and she
shook her head. “Maybe later,” she mouthed.
Jane wished she could take Emilia back-to-school
shopping. The social worker suggested she shop online
from her hospital room. Her computer would not work;
there was no wireless access from her room. Hospital policy
regarding isolation precautions prevented us from using
one of the computers assigned to the nursing station.
“That’s okay,” she said.
Jane told me that she wanted to go home. She was
tired of the sterility of the hospital, and she wanted to die
in her own bed after weeks on a plastic mattress. I met with
her mother and sister. Her mother spent several hours a
day caring for a son with chronic illness. Her sister had
battled Hodgkin disease a decade earlier, which was now in
remission. Both of them had recently watched Jane’s father
die in their home. Her mother begged me to tell Jane that
hospice in the home was not an option.
“I can’t be responsible for the ventilator. What if
something happens? I can’t watch her die and then wait for
the ambulance. I can’t watch them take her away in a body
bag.” I told Jane about her mother’s fears. “I understand,”
she said, but she was crying.
Days passed, and Jane was no better or worse. There
wasn’t any hope of getting off of the ventilator. She could
not go home. The social worker found a long-term hospital
near her home and arranged for an ambulance to pick her
up. The hospital was so close to home that her house was
visible from the window. Respiratory technicians at the
long-term hospital would manage her ventilator. It was a
good discharge plan. “This is not what I want. I want to go
home,” she said.
She asked for so little, and I could not give her any of
it. An online shopping trip didn’t seem like a big request.
Neither did a few hours in the company of her family as
they enjoyed a meal, or help in finding a way for her
daughter to remember her. A hundred years ago, Jane
probably would have died a much younger woman in a
back bedroom of her family home, surrounded by the people and things she loved best. The past century of medical
advances had bought her several additional years of life
expectancy, improved symptom control, and more services
for her family. But it had cost her, too. The machines that
tethered her to life also tethered her to the health care
system. Her existence revolved around the next procedure,
the next course of chemotherapy, or the next session of
radiation. She had become an observer of her own life
rather than an active participant. On the day that she left
the hospital, I don’t know if she felt that the gains had
been worth the cost.
I went back to see Jane on the morning she left the
hospital. She turned her head away from me with tears in
her eyes. Her pen and notebook were across the room. She
tossed them aside when I brought them to her. I said goodbye and she didn’t answer. I finally left the room with the
realization that I had done nothing to help her. Since then,
months have gone by, but her name isn’t in the obituary
notices. Maybe she is still sitting in a sterile room at the
long-term care facility, staring out the window and catching glimpses into the back bedroom of the home she’ll
never see again.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C047
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: Trial by Fire: First Medical Board Certification in Iraq

I am a National Guard physician and I happened to finish
my gastroenterology/hepatology fellowship on 30 June
2007. I planned to take my board certification test in October 2007, but I knew of my upcoming deployment in
Iraq at that time.
I had begun arranging to take my gastroenterology
boards in January 2007. I called my liaison, who was arranging my scheduled Iraqi rotation, at the Office of the
Chief Surgeon for the Army National Guard in Washington, DC, and inquired about whether anyone had taken
their board certification while deployed. She said that most
people returned to the United States to take their boards. I
explained that I thought we should try and see if I could
take my boards closer to my planned assignment at Tallil
Air Base, Iraq. I called Pearson Vue Testing Centers, who
administers the Gastroenterology Board Examination. The
Pearson Vue administrator and a representative from the
American Board of Internal Medicine (ABIM) asked me to
write a letter stating where I would need a testing site to be
set up. In July 2007, I received confirmation from Pearson
Vue that I would be taking my Gastroenterology Certification Examination on Tuesday, 23 October 2007, at
Camp Anaconda, Balad, Iraq.
Two days before the test, I left Tallil Air Base on a hot
C-130 and arrived in Balad (north of Baghdad) Sunday
night. On Monday, I studied all day except for a brief visit
to the education center. When I visited the education center, I was told that only one government computer had a
dependable connection, but I was assured that the room
would be available all day for my test. I asked for the
education officer to confirm my testing time. My admission ticket read to be there at 0900, but she requested that
I get there at 0730 hours.
I could not sleep Monday night due to indirect fire and
alarms going off. Later, I found that this base is affectionately
called “Mortaritaville.” I woke up at 0600 hours, went to eat,
and arrived at the testing center at 0730 for my scheduled
0900 test. The senior airman at the Education Center directed
me to a room, but I could not log into the Pearson Vue
testing site. He said that I should wait for his education officer
to come in after 0900. At 0900, she did not arrive so he tried
calling Pearson Vue, which was closed. He told me to wait
until 1000 hours for her to show up for her shift, but when
she did not arrive I asked the noncommissioned officer in
charge to find out what I was to do about testing. He made
some calls and said that the Pearson Vue computer was at
another site a few blocks away. The senior airman transported
me there at 1100 hours.
When I arrived at that site, I was told that the Pearson
Vue Testing proctor would not be available until 1300
hours, so I should go eat lunch. I was told that she would
download the test while I was eating. I arrived back to the
testing center at 1230 hours and met the proctor who said
she was having a difficult time downloading the test. The
computer was prompting her to contact ABIM. She could
not get anyone at ABIM, as it is based in the Unites States,
and it was 0400 Eastern Standard Time. She tried to call
Pearson Vue Testing in United Arab Emirates, who told
her to call the United States. Because it was in the middle
of the night in the United States, we called the United
Kingdom Pearson contact, who, after a couple of phone
calls, gave the proctor a code to unlock the computer. By
this time it was about 1600 hours local time. I had been up
for over 8 hours waiting to start the exam.
The proctor called the Pearson administrator in the
United States, described the trouble we were having, and said
that she would just administer the test tomorrow so that I
would be well rested. The Pearson administrator told the
proctor that the test was only administered one day and I had
to take it or lose the money. I asked that it be cancelled, but
the administrator said that I would still lose the money. I was
so tired that I did not think I would do well.
Around 1600 hours, I started the exam. During testing,
we received indirect fire and the alarms went off to seek cover.
I knew that this may happen again, so I looked at the partially
blank answer sheet and guessed on the last 40 questions to
ensure at least I would have a chance to answer every question.
I did not eat that evening except for some dry, stale
cereal that the proctor found while I took a bathroom
break after 4 hours of testing. I kept testing until midnight.
I was exhausted from dealing with all of the problems—
some military, some ABIM, and some Pearson.
I am not sure if this is the appropriate environment to
take any national board exam, as no one knows what may
happen in a war zone. I spent a lot time studying and over
$1500 to take this exam, and the lack of coordination
made a stressful exam even more stressful.
I am very appreciative of the proctor and her efforts in
getting the test running. I am appreciative of the National
Guard Bureau in assisting me with coordinating to take
this test in Iraq. I do not know if my circumstances are just
the initial “bugs” that have to be worked out, but I think it
is important to know the details of the first testing before
anyone else wants to test in Iraq.
I hope my experience sheds some light on any discussions about future board testing in Iraq.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C048
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: Fault

Crude tattoos of “LOVE” and “HATE” unfurled as the
angry, muscular man clenched and unclenched his
fists. I am not a small man, but this guy was scaring me.
“How the hell do you let my boy lay there for 4 days
before you even call me?”
“Mmm-hmm,” echoed the large woman at his side
who had introduced herself as the boy’s mother. In her
shadow was a nervous girl who had been crying or screaming a lot. She fidgeted and picked at invisible things on her
blouse—I wondered briefly what she was withdrawing
from.
Behind them were at least 12 other family members,
or perhaps gang members, who glared at me. Catherine, a
nurse I’d worked with in the intensive care unit for 5 years,
had a strange expression. Was that fear in the eyes of the
seen-it-all trauma nurse? To make matters worse, someone
had called hospital security—add 2 beefy guys, and the
room now felt very small.
“You tell me,” clench, unclench, LOVE, HATE.
“Why do they take the boy out of his car, they don’t book
him, they put him right in jail, not in the holding area but
in a cell—and then they do nothing. No phone call. Nothing. Why?”
I had absolutely no idea what he was talking about. I
realized suddenly that my entire knowledge of the criminal
justice system came from “Law & Order.” I had no answers to these questions.
“He had a bench warrant, but sheeeeit.”
Bench warrant?
“Let me tell you what we know.” I prayed that my
doctor voice and the medical “we” would cover for my
growing panic. I have given a version of this speech to at
least 100 families in this very room. I write papers and give
lectures about end-of-life care in the intensive care unit. I
am good at this.
“At around 2 a.m. on Christmas Day, while in custody, your son started behaving erratically . . .”
“Says who?” the large lady asked. The crying girl fidgeted and picked.
“. . . and was banging his head against the wall. To
protect him . . .”
“Protect him?” his mother crossed her arms.
“To protect him, the officers needed to restrain him.
He fought them off . . .”
“There you go, my brother,” said a voice from the
group of onlookers.
“And at some point, the officers noted that he wasn’t
breathing. CPR was initiated, and he was resuscitated and
brought here. Unfortunately, his brain went without oxygen for so long that he is now in a coma. It only takes a few
minutes without . . .”
“Listen, they killed the boy, and you are just covering
it up. I know how this crap works. I’ve been around. Why
the hell did it take you 4 days to call me? It was Christmas
for Christ’s sake. We had no idea where the boy was.”
He had a point. I wouldn’t mind a straight answer to
that question, either. Do I tell him that a prisoner is a ward
of the court and that the police would not let us call anyone? That if the nurses had not threatened the detective
with physical harm the family still would be waiting for
news? It didn’t quite feel like the right time to share this
information.
There is a natural bond of trust between a physician
and a patient’s family in the intensive care unit. People
want to trust the doctor. I had dealt with lack of trust
before. I had even caused it by pushing a family too soon
for decisions when they were not ready to hear bad news.
Trust could be regained, but this family hadn’t lost trust in
me—they didn’t trust anyone to begin with. He wasn’t
going to drive a car again, wasn’t going to recognize his
mother or the fidgety girl, and certainly wasn’t going to be
serving any jail time. Important decisions about his future
needed to be made, and I needed their trust to be able to
make them.
“I went to look at that chart in his room and they
grabbed it from me,” the boy’s father said. More clenching
and unclenching. I looked at Catherine, her eyes said,
“What did you expect me to do?”
“Catherine, can you get the chart for us?” I envied her
quiet sigh of relief as she escaped the room.
I thanked myself for the lecture I gave the resident the
night of admission: “I don’t know what happened in that
jail and neither do you. This kid had a cardiac arrest and
now has anoxic brain injury. I don’t want to see any theories about the nature of the arrest or the timeliness and
adequacy of CPR. I don’t want to see anything in that
chart that isn’t something we see or know for a fact. Oh
yeah, and make sure that the lab stores some blood from
the ER draw.”
“Sir, we are going to sit here and go over every word of
this chart until you are satisfied.” We went through the
chart for 45 minutes. The man got angrier as we turned
each page. He wanted to see the “original” medic notes,
not the carbon copies that go in the chart. He didn’t believe that I wrote my notes without “a little help from the
police.” He didn’t believe the CAT scan results or the
blood tests. He didn’t believe a single word in the chart.
My plan wasn’t working.
Now I am getting angry. What is your problem? I am
showing you the chart. I am explaining everything. I did not
cause this. I am a good guy. I work in a public hospital. This
is not my fault.
I look around. Fourteen angry black faces hunched
over a medical chart, and 4 white tense faces on the other
side of the table.Sometimes when I tell the story of what happened
next, I pretend that my outburst was calculated. A courageous gambit delivered with precision. Maybe it was. Actually, I think I was just angry and desperate. Maybe that’s
where courage comes from most of the time anyway.
I squared my shoulders and dropped the doctor voice.
“I’m not sure why you are so angry.” I leaned forward
confrontationally, “Don’t you think that part of the reason
you are so pissed off is that I am the first white guy in a tie
that you can yell at?”
There was a long pause. He straightened his back.
HATE. LOVE. Clench.
I hadn’t been hit since the eighth grade.
He pushed his chair back and stood up. The officers
behind me rustled. “You are goddamned right I am pissed.
My boy is dead in there and someone is going to pay.”
He believed what I was saying about his son’s condition and someone was going to get hit, but apparently not
me. Two small victories.
“You have to understand my situation. I am a sort of
mechanic. Someone brings me a car after a terrible crash. I
can tell you what is wrong with the car. I can try to fix the
car. But you want me to tell you who caused the crash,
who was driving the other car, and why he didn’t stop. I
don’t know any of that. I am trying like crazy to fix the
car—and if I can’t fix the car I can at least help people
understand how badly it’s broken.”
I only stopped talking because I had to take a breath.
I stared up at the man and took another deep breath to
launch another volley.
“Mmm-hmm,” the boy’s mother nodded sympathetically in my direction and fixed a reproachful stare at the
tattooed man. He picked up his chair and slumped into it,
cradling his face in his hands. The pacing girl stopped
fidgeting. The gallery shuffled. The guards relaxed. I exhaled.
Three days after our first meeting, Clement Wilson’s
mother and father stood by as I turned off their son’s
ventilator and watched his body catch up with his brain,
which had mostly died early Christmas morning.
Eleven months later...
A court summons is never good news. I had to pull the
chart to remember the case. I read my admitting note:
“Anoxic brain injury status post cardiac arrest of unknown
etiology. Tox screen pending. Currently hemodynamically
stable. Neuro exam – absent corneal, gag. Myoclonus.
Prognosis: poor.” The summons was for a coroner’s inquest to determine the cause of Clement’s death. When the
blood from the ER tested positive for cocaine, I became
acquainted with the literature on restraint-related deaths. I
couldn’t believe there were careers devoted to this topic. It
turns out that “restraint” is pretty stressful on the body. It
turns out that cocaine and restraint are a pretty good recipe
for ventricular fibrillation. The clinical picture seemed
clear, but fault? There was plenty of that to go around. I
had the suspicion a civil case was inevitable.
There they were. A muscular man standing uncomfortably in a suit. A large woman in a flowery dress that
looked like it had been worn to church a lot. No sign of
the girl.
We are, after all, complete strangers. I don’t remember
their names. I feel like I am on the other side of that table
all over again. There are even guards.
Before I can think, I am enveloped by the woman’s
arms in a crushing hug. Her words come in between small
sobs, “Sorry . . . Mess up your day... Take you away
from ...Meant so much... Thank you.”
The man shakes my hand. Hard.
I didn’t get to say much that day. Every time I opened
my mouth to answer a question for the judge, the family’s
lawyer objected. At one point the lawyer said, “Doctor,
aren’t you like a mechanic after a car crash. I mean you
tried to fix the boy, but can you possibly have any idea who
is at fault here?”
I was about to tell this lawyer that that was exactly
how I felt and then I stopped. I turned and looked at the
tattooed man sitting in the back of the courtroom, who
was smiling at me. I smiled back.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C049
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: No Question of Denial

Now in my mid-70s, I have been on the teaching faculty of a Boston medical center for over 40 years. Like
many physicians, I believed that belonging to the profession conferred some sort of immunity to disease—illness
only happened to patients.
Fifteen years ago, I noticed a sense of heaviness and
stiffness in my left leg as I walked across campus. I recall
the moment vividly because the clumsiness was in sharp
contrast to the harmony of the New England fall day. After
a few weeks, I told my wife, a neuropsychologist, about the
nagging feeling in my leg. She had noticed that my handwriting had grown smaller and more difficult to read.
“See a neurologist,” she said.
Two days later I was in the Chief of Neurology’s office. He was gentle and meticulous as he examined me, yet
his questions pierced me to my core.
“Do you have difficulty tying your bow tie? Your
shoes? Is it hard for you to brush your teeth?”
Such deficits were never to belong to me. I answered
defensively, guardedly.
“No. At least not yet.”
I knew what he was thinking. I needed a second opinion. I did not want this diagnosis, had no time for it. Seven
neurologists later, there was a consensus.
My first medication (amantadine) was effective for less
than 2 months, and I graduated to levodopa/carbidopa and
ropinirole. Despite an increasing dosage, I progressively
stiffened and slowed. I was continually exhausted and
needed frequent naps. I never developed a classic tremor,
which reassured me that perhaps 8 neurologists could be
wrong. But thinking took much longer, and this frightened
me greatly. I had to cut back on my working hours. Maybe
it was aging.
With great difficulty, I “came out of the closet” about
my Parkinson disease after a year, breaking through my
own denial and announcing it at medical grand rounds.
The support of colleagues and students was astounding.
They carried my tray in the cafeteria, helped me with my
coat, opened doors for me, walked me across campus in
poor weather, and covered for me when they felt I was too
fatigued—all overkill that I tolerated, you understand, because I remained convinced mine was a mild case and not
progressive.
Then came the episodes of falling and the consequent
humiliation. I would suddenly find myself on the ground,
not quite sure how I got there, but confused and concerned
that strangers would think I was drunk.
The dyskinesias began 6 or 7 years into the illness, a
side effect of the medications and not a consequence of the
illness—iatrogenic, in other words. The choreoathetosis,
involuntary rapid movements of my head, of which I was
aware only when looking in the mirror, was deeply embarrassing. People tried not to stare. I tried to immobilize my
head in my hands. Then my body began to partner with
my head in a wild herky-jerky dance. I would “treat” this
periodic grotesque ballet by not taking my medications,
but then muscle stiffness would prevent me from walking.
I would freeze, as if my feet were rooted to the ground.
Some choice to make between a statue or a puppet. There
was no longer any “normal” with this thing, nor any question of denying what was engulfing my body.
One morning at Logan Airport, a 3-year-old girl stared
at me as I writhed and bobbed.
“Look, Mommy,” she said. “That man over there is
dancing!”
“Why don’t you go dance with him?” her mother said.
The delighted child ran to my side and started to mirror my dyskinetic movements. A small crowd gathered to
watch us. When my boarding call came, I bent over and
whispered to the adorable child.
“Sorry, I must go. You’re going to have to find a new
dance partner.”
I had reached a point 10 years into my disease where
increasing medications didn’t help, so I was evaluated and
accepted for deep-brain stimulation. I awoke with a left
visual field cut, slurred speech, and ataxia the morning
after surgery. The surgical team told me that I would be
fine in time, the hematoma and the edema would resolve,
and the surgery should lead to a 50% improvement in my
movement disorder and necessitate only half of the preoperative dose of my medication. Fine. Not a cure, but
“fine.”
I now work 2 days a week. I no longer drive. I have
variously felt depressed, angry, isolated, imprisoned, and
victimized. I’ve hired a driver. I wear a timer around my
neck to remind me to take my pills.
I knew of this disease from textbooks, meetings, and
updates and from my patients who had it. But I found out
I really knew so little. My greatest fear is becoming bedridden and totally dependent. I know this might happen,
but I live each day in a state of “informed denial.” And it
works.
And if a physician can exercise a denial so great, can
we blame our patients for doing so?
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: C050
author_type: caregiver
source: On Being a Doctor
title: In Defense of the Personal Statement

As the director of an internal medicine residency program, I read hundreds of personal statements every
year. I know many program directors who find them irrelevant at best, and I confess I can't blame them. These
statements usually follow 1 of 3 scripts: The candidates
relay a medical catastrophe that afflicted them or their family. Curiosity is piqued. They indulge their curiosity by
poring over endless tomes of biologic sciences and end up
in medical school. Or, they know that they've wanted to be
a doctor since conception. They were always exceptionally
skilled in the sciences but really wanted to help people.
Medical school was the natural conclusion. Or, lasdy, the
curious case of Mr. X, who tells me a great deal about the
unfortunate patient but surprisingly little about the candidate. All candidates then have some sort of revelation during their internal medicine clerkship, and that is how their
applications arrived on my computer screen.
I hate them all. Not the candidates, but their personal
statements. Because there's really very little that's personal
about them. The major thing they've told me about themselves is that they are very much like 90% of the other
candidates for my program, or that they've engaged the
services of whatever essay mill produces such stultifying
prose. I'm not sure which is worse.
I've felt this way ever since I had to write my own
personal statements for college, medical school, and residency applications. I felt that the personal statement was a
great opportunity to tell the programs how I differed from
the other candidates. My scores may not have been the
best, and my grades wouldn't bowl anyone over, but my
personal statement—that was an opportunity to convince
the program that they should still give me a look. The one
that I remember most vividly is the one I wrote for my
internal medicine residency application. I wrote about
growing up on a South Dakota farm in the mid-1970s, in
the era before genetically modified soybeans were bred to
resist some of the most potent herbicides known to man.
Back then, we got rid of weeds the old-fashioned way—by
hand. As 1 of 4 children, I was expected to wake up at
dawn in the summer months and join the rest of the kids
in our more than 100-acre soybean field, slowly trudging up
and down each and every row attacking any weed we encountered, with either my hands or the blunt kitchen knife I carried. Some of the weeds were taller than I was and seemed to
attract muldtudes of sdnging insects that I am convinced have
yet to be catalogued. Afiier 5 hours of this, we would all be
glazed with some combination of sweat, dirt, and mangled
insect corpses. We weren't paid for this. Our reward was a
possible trip to the public swimming pool that afi:ernoon. (We
were, by the way, probably the driving force behind why people are required to shower before entering the water.) I winced
a litde as I mailed my statement, hoping that I hadn't portrayed myself as too much of a hayseed, while at the same time
knowing that it was a large part of my story. This was the
truth and the essence of me in 500 words or less.
The response was overwhelming. Every single interviewer asked me about it, and it usually led to a spirited
and satisfying conversation. One Bat-out told me that he
thought I was lying, and I spent the greater part of the
interview convincing him otherwise. Another looked at me
almost thankfully and told me it was one of the best personal statements he'd ever read.
Now that I'm a program director, I think I know why.
The overwhelming majority of personal statements are excruciatingly boring. It seems that our standardization of
the medical school curriculum has led to a generation of
physicians who feel the need to be standardized people as
well, even when making statements that are by their very
title intended to be personal.
Give me the personal statement that describes cowering
under the kitchen table during a raging kitchen fire. Give me
the one that describes the confiicdng feelings of having an
opposidonal soldier in the cross hairs, knowing that one day
you may be the very medic assigned to help him. I want to
hear from the candidate who appreciates the fibers of alpaca
wool, the benefits of paindng with oils rather than acrylics, the
one who won the world clogging championships at the age of
12, or the one who worked hard at becoming a varsity football
player but ended up handing out towels on the bench. These
are the personal statements that convey appreciadon of fear,
conflicted emodons, beauty, success, and feilure. These are the
ones that demonstrate a feature that is still key to being a
doctor: humanity. How else are we to know about this side of
our candidates if not for their personal statements? And don't
even think about su^esdng that we rely on the letters of
recommendation: I have read far too many that are written for
different individuals but are word for word idendcal. They're
fi:equendy much worse than the personal statement, and for
that, shame on us.
Our medical students need to be encouraged to bring
themselves to life in their personal statements. They need
to find something—anything—that describes them as an
individual. Encourage them to share their love of dogs,
their fear of clowns, their culinary successes, and their
camping nightmares. Tell them to present themselves as
someone swimming in this ocean of life and not the buoy
bobbing on top of it. For the sake of program directors
everywhere, I beg this of you.
---NARRATIVE_END---