---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P001
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Left atrial myxoma

I was a seemingly healthy 60 year old working as a part time
frame conservator. About three months before my diagnosis, I
noticed being short of breath, particularly when using the stairs
and climbing hills with my dog. I also experienced dizziness;
felt generally tired, which I put down to aging; had occasional
night cramps; and saw “stars” when bending; and I once
collapsed at a supermarket. In addition, I was referred to an ear,
nose, and throat surgeon in January 2011 for vocal cord
weakness, as I was constantly clearing my throat especially
when speaking on the telephone. A magnetic resonance imaging
scan of my brain revealed nothing abnormal.
The week before my diagnosis I noticed increasing tiredness
together with a dull ache on the left side of my chest. The day
before I consulted my doctor I was walking on the flat with a
friend. She persuaded me to seek help because she was
concerned that my breathlessness was not caused by my asthma
but possibly by my heart.

My doctor arranged for a series of blood tests and
electrocardiography to be carried out the same day at the surgery.
He subsequently told me that he had called an ambulance as
there were gross irregularities on the electrocardiogram and that
he suspected ischaemic heart disease. I remember thinking he
must be over-reacting because my chest pains were not that
intense and I was shocked by his decision to call an ambulance.
I was taken to the Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital, where I
had further blood tests, was interviewed by a doctor, and had
chest radiography.

The following day the cardiothoracic surgeon saw me. He
explained his proposed course of action and that he would phone
my husband when the operation was over.
The next few days after surgery were difficult because of the
pain, disorientation, and discomfort of being hooked up to
drains. I was transferred to a ward from where my recovery was
reasonably fast. Throughout my stay I felt great admiration for
my carers but was aware of the huge pressure they were under
and the need to discharge quickly.

After five days I was discharged home. My husband is in his
70s, has osteoarthritis, and found the prospect of caring for me
daunting. I, on the other hand, was desperate to be at home, in
my own bed, and trying to regain a sense of normality. It is a
difficult balance—the sole carer trying to do the right thing and
the patient keen to get back to “normal” as soon as possible.
The recovery from open heart surgery was slow, painful, and
sometimes depressing. I made myself type my own patient
journey as a cathartic process almost as soon as I arrived home
and sent it to family members and friends. The sense of shock
and fear from them was palpable. Shock from the diagnosis and
fear that I would not survive.
I do feel I was discharged too early. The move towards early
discharge seems huge, which is fine when patients are supported
and local hospitals have outreach, but in my case, with the
exception of visits from the district nurse to monitor my
anticoagulants (and that’s only because I said I felt I could not
attend the practice) there was no support. My husband did speak
to my doctor about my discharge and the possibility of a period
of admission to hospital to help with recuperation and was told
that there was no infrastructure available.
As far as contact with health professionals was concerned this
was very much at my request. My doctor did not visit me.
However I telephoned him a couple of times to discuss better
pain management. I attended the local surgery once at the
beginning of my recovery for a check of my anticoagulation, I was then transferred to a ward where the admitting consultant
told me that all the test results were negative, but that he would
request an urgent echocardiography for suspected
cardiomyopathy. I was then discharged and told to wait for an
outpatient appointment. The shortness of breath became
increasingly worse and I found myself resting most afternoons.
At this point I realised there was something very wrong, since
prescribed diuretics were making no difference to the symptoms.
After a few days I received a phone call giving me an
appointment for echocardiography. I was seen within the week.
The feelings I experienced on the day of this diagnostic test
were ones of fear but anticipation that I would be given an
accurate diagnosis. I remember the technician’s face when she
said, “We can now give you a clear diagnosis for your shortness
of breath.” The relief I felt was enormous. I was dreading the
confirmation of cardiomyopathy, never thinking what was next
to come.
The cardiology registrar confirmed I had a “mass” in the left
atrium called a myxoma, which would need to be excised at the
cardiothoracic centre in Plymouth. He told me that I would be
admitted immediately for a few more tests before transfer.
While awaiting transfer, many thoughts entered my mind, one
of which was why did I leave this so long before doing anything
about the symptoms? I realise in hindsight that I was petrified
this was a condition that was never going to get better, so I
pretended that it was not there. The surgery was going to involve
extensive surgical intervention, cardiopulmonary bypass,
collapsing of the lungs, a potential blood transfusion, a long
recovery, and a fair bit of pain. Never once did I consider I
would not recover.
That night I was taken to the coronary care unit at the
cardiothoracic centre. I recall the ear piercing noise of the
monitors all night long. A nurse supervised me, two doctors
took long medical histories, and finally an anaesthetist arrived.

but insisted a district nurse visited me at home because I truly
felt too ill to make the effort required. I also did not want to be
sitting in a car as the seat belt was far too painful across my
healing sternum. As soon as I felt able to I did attend the surgery
for my anticoagulants to be monitored.
My recovery has been reasonably unproblematic, although the
discharge medication of paracetamol for pain management was
not adequate, particularly given the major surgery I had
undergone and that I had required a morphine pump on the ward.
I was persuaded by my doctor to consider tramadol, which was
indeed more effective. I was off all pain relief by nine weeks
and any treatment by 12 weeks.
At the postoperative appointment at seven weeks the biopsy
report showed a left atrial myxoma. The results of
electrocardiography and chest radiography were normal. I
required no follow up.
I realise how fortunate I am to have had a reasonably speedy
diagnosis, which helped to save my life. Perhaps my general
state of fitness and health was also a bonus, but with hindsight
if I had waited much longer I fear the outcome would not have
been so positive. I am now symptom-free and able to live my
life without shortness of breath. I am now walking and climbing
hills, and, while being careful and still tired, now consider my
daily routine normal rather than a nightmare, unlike before
surgery.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P002
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Fatigue in primary biliary cirrhosis

I was diagnosed with the liver disease primary biliary cirrhosis
(PBC) in January 1986, at 42 years old. Unusually, my general
practitioner recognised it and immediately referred me to the
Freeman Hospital in Newcastle. Many people take years to get
a diagnosis, as doctors often do not recognise the symptoms or
attribute them to other illnesses such as depression. At the
hospital I was told that there was no treatment for my disease
but that they would look after me. I was told that it affected
about nine women for every one man, and there were more
known cases in northeast England than anywhere else in the
world. However, I knew no one else with this disease, I had
never heard of it nor had any of my friends, and so it was a very
lonely time.
By the time I was diagnosed, I knew I was different from my
friends. I was always more tired than they were; less able to
cope with a day out; ached all over, especially in my legs and
arms; and could not lift heavy pans easily. I was used to being
an active person: I played squash and badminton, did a lot of
walking and gardening, did my own decorating, and had a good
social life. As a single parent with two teenage children, this
was a difficult time for me. I did not tell my children about my
illness and tried to hide it from them. I used to take them to
school then go home and sleep for several hours each day,
setting the alarm for 2 pm so that I could pull myself together,
iron a shirt and blouse for the next day for theirschool uniforms,
and think about what I could make for an evening meal (most
days it was a take-away or something very simple).
As the years passed, I became more and more fatigued. I was
alwaystired, but I could notsleep properly at night. My daughter went to university, and I am embarrassed to say it was a relief
because I then only had my son at home for most of the year.
Eventually, he also left home, and that made my life easier
because they did not see how I was coping, and on my bad days
(which by then outnumbered my good ones) I could stay in bed
until lunchtime if necessary. Some days I managed to get up,
shower, get dressed, and do something. Those were good days.
Normal days were those when I got up eventually, had a shower
by lunchtime, and then just sat and read or watched television
for the rest of the day. On bad days I usually stayed in bed,
although I would tend to get up around 4 pm and sit in my
dressing gown until it was time to go back to bed. My social
life deteriorated to the point where I rarely went out in the
evenings, and during the day I did not like to plan ahead as I
was never sure how much I would be able to manage. When
friends visited I used to make a supreme effort to act normally
and would put on a good show while they stayed with me, but
when they left I would be so exhausted I would be tearful and
I would take several days to recover.

During this time I often mentioned the fatigue to the hospital
doctors, who varied greatly in their attitude to it. Some were
very sympathetic, although they couldn’t really offer any
treatment. Others obviously felt I should pull myself together.
One suggested I try to take up squash again. Almost universally
there was a sense that, as my liver function tests were quite
good, this could not really be a problem related to my liver
disease. Eventually, David Jones became my consultant. He
always believed in the fatigue, and, although there was still no
treatment, just knowing that he took on board what I wassaying
was a great help and made me feel better.

In 1994 a group of liver patients set up a support group,
LIVErNORTH, based at the Freeman Hospital. I was a founder
member and joined the committee as honorary secretary. This
brought me into contact with many other people with PBC and
helped me, as it meant I no longer felt alone. Talking to others,
it was apparent that most of us had the same problem with
fatigue, and we also realised that we had problems with memory.
We compared notes on how we coped—in reality we did not
cope very well—and on our shared experiences with doctors
who just didn’t understand or accept fatigue as a problem. I felt
I had “dumbed down” and no longer expected so much of
myself. There were times when I would be in the middle of
some housework and would just have to walk away and take to
my bed, abandoning the ironing, vacuuming, or whatever. The
ironing board would stand unused for days, the vacuum cleaner
would remain in the middle of the room, and I would walk round
it but would not have the energy to put it away. Because my
brain wasstill working reasonably well, I knew I was not coping.
At meetings we talked about how we no longer achieved what
we thought we should—we certainly could not keep up with
our “normal” friends. I walked with a group but eventually
stopped asI wastold, very nicely, that I wasslowing them down
too much: to be honest, it was a relief to be able to stop as it
had become a nightmare for me.
The problem with fatigue is that it is hidden. I don’t look
different from other people: when I say I am tired they tell me
how tired they are, and if I try to explain the difference they do
not understand what I am talking about. When I was first
diagnosed my GP told me that I would never get any sympathy
asI would alwayslook reasonably well and my symptoms would
have no impact on other people’s understanding of my life. The
fatigue that I and my fellow PBC patients contend with is mind
numbing. You feel as if you are in a fog, you can hardly lift one
foot in front of the other, everything is so difficult. You go
shopping and then cannot unpack the groceries, so the frozen
food defrosts and has to be thrown out. You plan a meal and
forget to turn on the oven; if you do turn on the oven and cook
the meat, you cannot manage to do the vegetables so it ends up
being sandwiches.
In 1999 I had a liver transplant as my liver had deteriorated to
such a point that I was not able to function, and a transplant was
the only option. While I am better than before my operation, I
continue to feel tired, although it is not the same as the previous
fatigue. Recently, PBC patients were asked if we would be
prepared to consider participating in a trial of a drug that might
improve our fatigue, but which could have side effects. My
answer was immediate: I would consider any treatment that
might improve my fatigue. When I discussed it with other PBC
patients, they all had the same attitude. Everyone said they
would consider any treatment that might offer a way out of this
existence. We feel we are in a no man’s land—on the outside
looking in, or sometimes locked inside and cannot get out. We
do not feel part of the normal population, and this is very sad.
We would love to be the lively, energetic people we once were,
and if there is anything that can make us feel that way, we will
take it like a shot.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P003
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: At either end of the tube


We are often told that experiencing illness will make us better
doctors. Perhaps one of the more extreme examples of this is
being intubated and sedated in the intensive care unit five weeks
before starting work there.
I was in the second month of my foundation year 1. I had been
sent home on two consecutive days for vomiting on the ward,
and when I returned colleagues mentioned that I had lost weight.
As I struggled to clerk a patient for an elective finger operation,
he commented, “I think that you are more unwell than I am,
doctor.” The rigors continued through that day, and I was sent
home again in blissful ignorance of the severity of my condition.
I continued to feel dreadful, became anuric, and was admitted
to our hospital’s medical assessment unit. A medical student
took my history, performed an examination with an incredibly
detailed neurological component, and presented a diagnosis of
viral gastroenteritis. I was beginning to become concerned, but
the medical team reassured me that my high C reactive protein
and thrombocytopenia were not significant. I was aware that I
was due to rotate through this unit and did not question that no
qualified clinician had examined me. These doctors were my
seniors, and I did not want a reputation as a paranoid
hypochondriac before my first ward round there. I was
discharged the next morning.
The fever got worse. I had not eaten in days, continued to rigor,
and was beginning to hallucinate. I was due to fly to India for
my brother’s wedding when I saw my general practitioner again.
She commented that I looked “awful,” which I found strangely
reassuring—I was not wasting another senior clinician’s time.

She expertly discovered a new murmur and the splinter
haemorrhages that I had missed.
The diagnosis of endocarditis was devastating and terrifying,
but an excellent cardiology team ensured I was on my feet and
back to work. Unfortunately I had not escaped complications;
severe mitral regurgitation meant I was to face open heart
surgery the next spring.
The six months between diagnosis and surgery rolled by, and I
convinced myself that I was neither anxious nor unwell. At
work I wanted no special treatment and undertook all my
responsibilities as a junior doctor. I rotated through the medical
assessment unit and even worked under the consultant who had
dismissed me so quickly. He seemed to have no memory of me
or my admission, and I did not ever mention it.
As surgery approached, I became very particular about planning
every small detail I could—such as specific music for the
hospital and which T shirt I would wear. I even reconciled with
an old girlfriend when I discovered she would be the foundation
year 1 doctor covering my postoperative ward. In retrospect, I
realise that this was my way of hiding from the fear of it all.
While I regarded the surgery itself as a matter of routine, what
worried me was the outcome. The decision about whether to
repair or replace the valve was to be made intraoperatively, the
latter ensuring a limited valve life and ongoing warfarin
treatment. I was wheeled into theatre with my future uncertain.
My memory of events in the intensive care unit after surgery,
intubated and sedated, feels unshakably real. However, these
memories proved to be inaccurate in both sequence and content
when I recounted them to those present.
All I can recollect from those 18 hours are events that had an
association with the people and world I knew. A friendly visitor
or piece of medical jargon would punctuate the fog of my stay
with momentary clarity. My thought process at the time was totally devoid of both insight and emotion. Even being told that
the valve repair had been successful, and the replacement I
feared had been avoided, was processed purely as a fact. There
was no elation, no relief. Being sedated was like living a
synchronous yet separate life from reality.
My first visitor was Robin, a good friend from medical school.
I clearly remember him leaning over my bed with the same
sympathetic smile and manner he has always used with patients.
I later learnt this was fiction; he was actually teasing me for
squeezing his hand with uncharacteristic affection. I could only
salivate in response. I can’t explain my clear visualisation, as
he assures me I did not open my eyes. I wonder if all sedated
patients are like me, apparently using past experiences to make
sense of current events.
Unconscious and intubated, I was relying on my instincts. My
training certainly influenced how I behaved, although this was
not necessarily appreciated by the nursing staff. We are drilled
in the benefits of patient controlled analgesia as medical
students, and this was reiterated preoperatively by my
anaesthetist. My brain told me I had had an operation and
therefore I must push the button. So I did—excessively. I was
pain-free throughout, yet I could overhear the staff discussing
increasing my analgesia in response to my unrelenting use of
the analgesia button.
Experience had also taught me that a poor arterial trace can be
the result of suboptimal positioning of an arterial line. When I
overheard a visiting colleague discuss my low blood pressure
reading my right arm became completely disinhibited, and I
started waving it around like an elated dog’s tail, perhaps in a
subconscious attempt to improve the trace. Thereafter, only
physical restraint from my nurse came close to achieving optimal
positioning.
Before surgery I was concerned that delirium would be a feature
of my stay, and I feared being sectioned. It seems that a visitor
could act as a trigger to my vulnerable mind, precipitating florid
auditory and visual hallucinations. A colleague jokingly
commented on the height of my “ST segments.” Consequently,
a fictional registrar requested a fictional troponin level. A
fictional group of nurses then refused to carry out the request,
arguing their case by sketching a fictional graph of cardiac
enzymes on the wall in permanent black marker. When I was
lucid the following day, this sketch was notably absent.
My first conscious thought process was my desire to be
extubated, which seemed to go on for hours. I could hear the
nurses saying that I was not yet awake enough to be extubated,
but I was thinking, “Yes I am, I just can’t tell you.” Despite the
sensation of choking, I was not distressed; rather I was frustrated
as I struggled to get my point across. I found that biting the tube
led to more sedation, so I eventually gave up and then somehow
got my wish. I had completed my adventure through fiction and
delirium to conscious thought and extubation.
My journey concluded five weeks later, back in the intensive
care unit, but this time as a foundation year 2 doctor. I was
concerned that my return to the same environment might trigger
suppressed emotions. Thankfully this fear was unjustified. My
only apprehension was of being singled out from my new
colleagues, so I hid my sternotomy scar with a T shirt under my
scrubs.
Could things have been different had I insisted on a further
examination on my initial presentation? Could I have avoided
surgery and a sternotomy scar? These questions will remain
unanswered, but I have been fortunate that my journey has had
a positive ending. Having been a patient in the intensive care
unit, I then discovered a love for intensive care as a doctor and,
one year later, began training in anaesthesia and critical care.
My experience has given me a greater insight into life as a
patient than I ever would have wanted, but it has equipped me
with a great deal of empathy and understanding for patients as
I now play my role in their similar journeys.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P004
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Dementia with cardiac problems

Shortly before my 60th birthday in August 2004, I experienced
sudden weakness of my left arm lasting for 40 minutes. I did
not take time off from work but phoned my general practitioner,
who sent me to the transient ischaemic attack clinic. I continued
to work but stopped driving. When I started driving again I
always found myself seriously lost, so I bought a satellite
navigation system. I was aware all wasn’t quite right and set up
careful systems to ensure I did not forget things. Tasks were
either completed at the time or written down, or I sent a reminder
email to myself. I was sure I was “safe.”
In January 2005 I had a bizarre experience—while shopping I
did not know what to do at the checkout. It was extremely
difficult to pack the shopping into bags, and I looked around to
gain clues as to how to do it. This alarmed me sufficiently to
make me return to my general practitioner, who sent me back
to the stroke clinic. They advised to stop driving and referred
to a neurologist. I continued to work. While visiting a patient I
was greeted by one of his visitors. I had no idea who she was,
even though she was a close neighbour of mine. I also found
myself unable to recognise family members in photographs.
The neurologist said there was nothing wrong, which made me
more determined to cover up my difficulties. I had a defining
moment in November at an important case conference, when I
did not recognise the convener of the local mental health team
whom I had known for 20 years. I persisted in asking him and
others who they were and why they were there.
When returning from a holiday in Nepal I became unconscious,
and the resuscitation team boarded the plane on touchdown. My
family persuaded me to go back to my general practitioner, and
I agreed to see a different neurologist and also a cardiologist.
For the record, my mother had died of a coronary when I was
four years old, and my father died at age 93 years of mixed
dementia.

I often thought I could smell gas and had a gas leak check done
at home, which was negative, and I even had drains checked at
work because of the awful smell. They found nothing. I could
no longer lecture unless I had prepared them as PowerPoint
presentations. At home my husband Stanley set up timer
switches on the iron and other equipment.
The second neurologist was surprised I had had no investigations
and ordered magnetic resonance imaging and single photon
emission computed tomography scans. In February 2006 I had
a neuropsychology assessment. The consultant said that my
intelligence enabled me to cover up my confusion and solve
problems in unusual ways. She told me she was unable to say
that I was safe to continue working. My partners were surprised
because they had not realised that anything was wrong with me.
I attended a conference but had great difficulty finding the
location and did not recognise people who obviously knew me.
I pretended to be OK but displayed bizarre behaviour, such as
pouring my neighbour’s drink over my food. I was unable to
get out of the glass foyer and had to wait for help, even though
a notice explained what to do. I forgot I had arranged for Stanley
to collect me. I still remember the occasion as a complete
nightmare.
A second neuropsychology assessment showed deterioration in
my verbal fluency. I had further collapses and became
increasingly muddled. I did not recognise people such as
Michael Howard on television. Olfactory hallucinations
continued, mainly with cigarette smoke or dog excrement.
I had been persuaded after retiring to continue to do appraisals,
and those who asked me were aware of my history. I was unable
to find the location of surgeries that I was familiar with, and
Stanley began to drive me to the locations, although I was able
to function once I was there.
By 2007 I discovered items in odd places, such as hair things
in the fridge. I did not recognise or even remember people who
had stayed in our house. However, being awarded the fellowship
of The Royal College of General Practitioners was a great
encouragement at the premature end of my career, which had
included time at a mission hospital in KwaZulu, South Africa,
and teaching and training doctors in Ukraine.
In January 2008 I fell down the stairs, unconscious, incontinent,
and badly bruised. My general practitioner referred me back to
the cardiologist, who started me on fludrocortisone, because he
thought my collapses were caused by low blood pressure and
cardiac arrhythmias. The medication made a dramatic difference.
He also sent me back to the neurologist, with whom I had not
had a follow-up appointment.
Stanley said he will never forget the look of terror on my face
when I did not recognise him. In May, the neuropsychology
professor told me I had something seriously wrong with my
temporal lobes. She explained to me that, although I had not
lost my intelligence, I could not read, because I did not actually
understand what the letters in some words meant. I had been
“coping” with situations by working things out from their
context. She recommended that I saw Peter Garrard, who had
successfully picked up early clues of Alzheimer’s disease in
Iris Murdoch and in Harold Wilson’s books and speeches.
Meanwhile I got swine flu, developed visual hallucinations, and
could not recognise or work out common articles of clothing.
Peter Garrard was very gracious and treated me with respect.
He suggested a transient ischaemic attack had alerted me to my
Alzheimer’s disease, since when I had kept a written narrative
of anything I thought indicated significant changes in my
memory or behaviour. My scores for the Addenbrooke’s
cognitive examination was 72/100, and for the mini mental state
examination it was 23/30. He started me on donepezil and
referred me to Southampton’s memory assessment research
clinic for a drug trial. Sleep disturbances and nightmares from
the donepezil were horrendous. Taking the medication in the
mornings helped, as did an MP3 player and pillow speaker.
While visiting the hospital for an outpatient appointment I had
collapsed again at the top of a concrete staircase. The
resuscitation team did a computed tomography scan assuming
I was unconscious because of the fall. On reflection I think it
was a side effect of the donepezil slowing heart conduction
together with my particular tendency to bigeminy. I was barred
from drug trials and prescribed memantine.
Three months later my family and friends were amazed at my
improvement. My speech, which had become very hesitant was
almost back to normal, although I was better at restarting
sentences rather than finding a particular word. I could read
books again but only those on familiar subjects. I could manage
my finances but still struggled on the phone, and all my
hallucinations disappeared.
I had more side effects from medication and so reduced the
doses slightly, but my olfactory hallucinations returned with a
vengeance. So I decided I would rather live with the side effects.
Motorway cloakrooms have been a nightmare. Dementia patients
often confuse doorways with pictures, mirrors, or cupboards. I
have overcome this problem by using the facility for people
with disabilities. I have difficulty pouring drinks and have to
concentrate very hard.
Shortly after my diagnosis and before I had told anyone, I met
a friend who asked me why I was ignoring her. Among other
things, she told me her name, that we went to the same church,
and that I had had tea with her the previous week. She persisted
until, suddenly, I “knew” who she was. This prompted me to
write an explanatory leaflet because I had previously enjoyed
producing educative leaflets for my patients. It has “travelled”
far much to my surprise and encouragement. In April 2010, The
Wessex Faculty Royal College of General Practitioners produced
a template of the leaflet for all local general practitioners. The
leaflet was a simple outline of my difficulties and what to do
or whom to contact. This leaflet, and others I subsequently
wrote, can be downloaded from the “Resources” section of my
website. I also believe my deep faith enables me to live with enthusiasm in the present as nothing
is wasted in God’s economy.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P005
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Visual agnosia

When I was 11 months old I developed herpes simplex
encephalitis after coming into contact with a cold sore, which
damaged the areas of the brain responsible for processing vision.
I was left with visual agnosia and had severe difficulties in
recognising people by their faces. I cannot remember the details
of the earliest events surrounding my illness, but I have talked
about them a lot with my family and this is my story.
During the illness I lost my sight as well as my ability to sit and
walk. It took me about six months to relearn to walk unaided.
During this time my vision gradually improved, but I had to
rely on my other senses to interact with the environment. I would
sniff, touch, and taste things around me, including the floor,
furniture, and people’s clothing, which some found unnerving.
My speech development was good. I found changes in routine
upsetting and puzzling. Mum had the support of medical and
educational professionals and on their advice I was taught at
home by an educational service (Portage) for preschool children
with additional support needs and their families, and I had a
support assistant at play school. Around this time mum noticed
I was making mistakes in recognising family members. Once I
was seen talking to my brother’s friend, mistaking him for my
brother (who looks completely different).
It wasn’t just a problem with recognising family members, or
people in general—mum had painted a Postman Pat mural on
my wall and despite being familiar with his character through
books and DVDs I just could not recognise him. However, it
was when mum realised that I couldn’t even recognise her that
things came to a head. This happened on a Portage course for
parents. As the parents entered the crèche, the children got up
and went to their mums and dads. I got up too, studied the adults
and then returned to my carer rather than going to my mum.
Although mum had been standing close to me, it wasn’t until she spoke that I got up and took her hand. Mum talked about
this to a teacher for the visually impaired at my nursery. He said
he thought I might have a facial agnosia. This was discussed
with the child neurologist at my next appointment, and
subsequently with a neuropsychologist.
My lack of recognition of family members caused all sorts of
difficulties. Mum will never forget the time I was on a child’s
amusement ride in the supermarket while she was close by
paying for her shopping. When the ride had finished she heard
me calling for her and then saw me being lifted out by a woman.
This stranger was reluctant to hand me back to my mum because
she didn’t see the flash of recognition she was expecting from
me.
I also had problems with object recognition. No one could
understand how I managed to find small objects dropped on the
floor but wasn’t able to recognise pictures of everyday objects.
When given a verbal clue I would always get the object right.
I couldn’t visually distinguish between animals such as a cat
and dog or a cow and sheep. This problem only improved after
many visits to farms and zoos.
When I first started school my eye contact was poor and despite
constant encouragement from my family, teachers, and carers
to lift my head I found it hard to look at people. My confidence
was lowered further by the repercussions when I misread facial
expressions.
Some aspects of my condition have improved but not the facial
agnosia and I continue to find the recognition and identification
of faces difficult. Recognition is even harder when people are
out of context or a particular feature such as hair colour has
changed. School was on occasions frustrating, not least because
everyone wore the same uniform. Finding friends both in and
out of the classroom could be difficult, so I had to rely on my
other senses. Things became easier when I moved into sixth
form, as students could wear casual clothing. Teachers found
my disability difficult to understand. Some believed it didn’t
exist and others didn’t understand that the problem arose from
my brain not my eyes. Unbelievably, at a parents’ evening a teacher asked mum whether all her children were blind, to which
(after taking a deep breath) she replied “On my last count, none
of my children is blind.”
Getting teachers to complete the simplest of tasks, such as using
a black pen on the whiteboard and enlarging worksheets, was
a test all of its own and made life in the classroom problematic.
Despite these challenges I was successful at GCSE level, with
10 good grades. Subsequently I studied English language, art,
and psychology at A level. As part of my psychology course I
studied face perception and its disorders and was asked to give
a series of talks to the other psychology classes. For my art A
level I brought together elements of Cubism and still life and
incorporated texture to give my work a more original and
interesting direction, reflecting the importance of touch in
helping me to understand my surroundings in my early life.
Over time I have built up my own strategies for recognising my
family and friends and those I am in daily contact with like my
work colleagues; for example, by remembering their style of
walk, hairstyle, and hair colour. I have also become good at
recognising voices and scents, including the perfume worn by
particular people. Recently I have become more sensitive to
sounds such as those made by jewellery and keys. I am able to
find mum in crowded places by the sound of her bangles and
dad by the sound of his car keys. This has increased my
confidence in public places. I remember when I was around
seven years old being perturbed at meeting identical twins who
were also identically dressed. Although neither I nor anybody
else could distinguish the twins by sight, for once my personal
strategies for distinguishing between people by voice, scent,
etc, failed me. I was left so scarred by this experience that
months later I avoided a close family friend “because she might
have a twin.”
A few years ago I was approached by my neurologist, Professor
Eyre. She asked if I would take part in a research study of face
training, with the aim of relearning the mathematics of face
recognition and using functional magnetic resonance imaging
scans to look for any changes in the brain. When babies and
children study faces intently their brains are learning to calculate
the distance between eyes, nose, and mouth and the width and
length of faces, which are the basics of expertise in recognising
faces. The training programme required me to categorise faces
based on differences in these distances. Involvement in the study
has improved my eye contact and confidence. My training scores
have also improved but I still have trouble recognising faces.
Despite this I am becoming more confident in my day to day
recognition of friends and family using all available means.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P006
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Persistent pain

I was told the pain would probably be with me for ever when the pancreatitis was diagnosed after months of
tests. I was already learning to live with it. Over the following months acceptance and coping got harder as I
was assessed for whether a pancreatectomy might stop the pain. I saw three consultants (in
gastroenterology, diabetes, and pancreatic surgery), who outlined the benefits and risks. It wasn’t the right
answer for me but it highlights a common dilemma: a chance to be free of pain sets you hoping and decisions about major intrusive procedures become an emotional roller coaster.

I’m a psychologist so I was already using ways of managing pain: relaxation, goal setting, staying positive. I
was referred to a pain clinic to see if I could improve what I was already doing. This was about 10 years ago
and services have moved on, but there are still lessons to be learnt even now, and the learning process is
continuous. Every patient had months of waiting to see a pain consultant, before being referred via another
waiting list to see a psychologist, then a third wait for group sessions to learn a few basic ways to manage
pain. Three waiting lists before learning useful strategies such as relaxation and positive thinking.
It didn’t make sense. Why wait so long to talk to people about understanding pain and simple ways to cope
with it? All that time for a downward spiral with patients off work, with bouts of depression, repeated clinic
attendance, increased use and side effects of painkillers, frustration with NHS staff, and ultimately referral to
an intensive pain management programme.
Coping with persistent pain effectively depends on patients understanding and managing their pain. And they
need to begin at the start of their “patient journey” not at the end. People need a positive message: you can
make a huge difference yourself and here are some of the ways you can do it. Ways of managing pain can be
easily taught using everyday language. If people don’t need simple pointers about relaxation or pacing—
because they improve or there’s an effective treatment—nothing is wasted. But meanwhile, it can open
people’s minds, help prevent that downward spiral, and set positive habits for later if that proves necessary.
And offering ways to manage pain early is cost effective because it minimises the personal and economic
costs of long term disability, unemployment, or mental health problems.
Pain management is a kind of curriculum: understanding pain; acceptance and positive thinking; relaxation
and managing stress; pacing; managing medication; and safe ways to stay active. To improve access and
reduce costs, the pain management advice can be delivered by nurses and physiotherapists in either primary
or secondary care, with some input from past patients who are managing their pain effectively. Health visitors
and nurses already support people with long term conditions; they can be at the heart of delivering pain
management.
It may be better to offer ways to manage pain without the psychology label. People can sometimes react to
the word “psychology” with resistance or distrust or be concerned that they may be seen as having a mental
health problem rather than physical pain. They may feel more open to self help in nurse led or patient led
groups than to a consultation with a psychologist, and they may be happy also to see physiotherapists for
advice on safe exercise. Psychologists could then train facilitators and see patients with more intractable
problems.
A patient centred approach doesn’t undermine the clinical route. Diagnosis is still crucial, and specific
treatments can still make a difference. But working in partnership right from the start with patients who take
control of their own care makes things easier for clinical staff too. Then by the time a patient sees a pain
consultant he or she will be informed and involved and may have more realistic expectations—especially if a
“cure” may not be possible.
As a patient
Lots of things make a difference to coping with persistent pain: relationships, personality, attitude to change,
staying active and involved, income, and realistic expectations. I see it as a kind of luck that I’m a determined
person as it helps me stay positive and build things into my life that I used to get from work: a sense of
purpose and belonging; making a contribution; contact with like minded people. My income is dramatically
reduced but we can manage. And my partner, Tony, has been there with the difficult job of being alongside
me, being kind, and not fussing when underneath he’s worried.
Persistent pain does disrupt your life. Living with pain will be a whole lot harder if you’re on your own or in a
strained relationship; if you’re naturally pessimistic and resistant to change; if you lose your job or are
trapped between benefits and low paid part time work; or if you expect a magic cure.
Doing things you love is important. I’ve always loved to dance and it lifts my spirits so much that the hike in
pain is worth it, with a good rest afterwards to recover. And letting go helps, too. So I sometimes give in and
have a private cry when the “never-endingness” of the pain needs an outlet, before I pick myself up and start
again.
As clinicians
I have good general practitioners and a good consultant. They listen. They give clear, full answers to my
questions and they’re open when they’re thinking things through or aren’t sure about something. That’s
incredibly important for trust. It’s helpful to hear their active problem solving. It’s honest and helps me to be
realistic when there really isn’t an answer. And it makes it feel like a shared journey, rather than being the
object of their unspoken thoughts.
Doctors can make a difference when symptoms change. It’s difficult to know whether changes are part of the
ongoing problem or might signal something else. There’s a danger of becoming scared of “what might
happen” and stopping doing things, so I’ve had to learn to balance staying active and being sensible. I hate
making a fuss and don’t want to live with constant attention to how I feel, so continuity and support from
doctors who know you is crucial. It can be difficult for doctors too when little can be done medically to
change the impact of persistent pain.
But more than anything else, the biggest difference that clinicians and managers can make is to ensure that
patients learn ways to cope with their pain as early as possible. There’s no such thing as a typical patient.
And yet we all need to understand our pain and learn how to cope with it. If we can learn to do that
effectively, as early as possible, it helps clinicians too. The worst thing—for the patient and their family, for
clinicians, for the health service, and for the economy—is to leave pain to create a downward spiral.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P007
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Tethered spinal cord syndrome

Tethered spinal cord syndrome is an unusual condition, 
thank goodness. I was almost certainly born with it, but 
for 58 years was unaware of the fact. By and large I fitted into the broad spectrum of “normal kids,” despite a 
well concealed secret sense that I was not quite right. I 
accepted reluctantly that I couldn’t run as fast as other 
boys in Bath, or play football as well. I got on with the 
things I was good at, as most people do.
In my 50s I began to suffer more and more with 
my lower back and legs, for which pain relief and 
physiotherapy were offered. Bladder control became 
more tricky and daily life a bit of a struggle. I kept 
working, reluctant to admit all this to myself. In the mid to late 1990s, while living and bringing up a family in 
south London, I saw a urologist in a London hospital. 
He assured me I didn’t have prostate cancer. I had 
never thought that I might have prostate cancer. The 
specialist put aside his colleague’s findings that I was 
retaining large quantities of urine in my bladder. 
Prostate cancer was his enthusiasm, whereas bladder 
control was someone else’s department.
In 1998 my wife and I moved back to Somerset. 
The episodes of back pain became more frequent. It 
was a physiotherapist in Frome, in 2002, who set me 
on the road to recovery. Studying how my body, legs, 
pelvis, and spine moved in obvious disharmony with 
one another, she finally confirmed that incoherent boyhood feeling of something not quite right about me. 
When my general practitioner, a kindly compassionate man, argued that I had managed 58 years with my 
funny body and would probably manage a few more, 
my physiotherapist put considerable pressure on him to 
refer me to a specialist.
The next stage (early 2003) was the most frightening 
period. I had to cancel a holiday at short notice “just 
in case.” In case of what? Various explanations were 
offered, none of which I understood. My body became a 
site of special scientific interest—or so it seemed—as I was 
subjected to more and more tests at the Royal United 
Hospital in Bath. The scans were fine: the staff told me 
what was going to happen, and it did. But the lumbar 
puncture hurt a lot and no one warned me of possible 
after effects as my body tried to compensate for the loss 
of those few precious drops of spinal fluid. As for having 
electric currents passed along nerves, the “light electric 
impulse” I was warned to expect struck me as more like 
jumping into a mains electric circuit. It didn’t help that I had three consultants in turn, 
although eventually I did meet someone who 
understood my condition. That was Mr Ian Pople, 
consultant neurosurgeon at Frenchay Hospital in 
Bristol. I knew he was the man. He had seen my 
scans, and instead of wanting to look at my tired back 
he asked me to remove my shoes and socks and roll 
up my trouser legs. It was a thrilling moment. He 
admired the crabbed toes on my right foot and then 
whipped out his tape measure and confirmed the 3 
cm difference between the healthy left and shrunken 
right calf muscles. We smiled at one another in mutual 
recognition. His assistants gazed in awe.
That was in February 2004. Mr Pople wanted to operate in the spring, but it wasn’t quite that easy. As a self 
employed writer and researcher (and far from being a 
bestseller), I needed time to build up a fighting fund 
to see me through a long convalescence. No problems 
about waiting lists here—it was I who needed more time, 
not least to sort out my feelings. I had put aside those 
childhood doubts, that feeling of being not quite right. 
I had spent a lifetime pretending that all was well. Now 
that was coming to an end. A lifetime habit of trying to 
be strong and independent would have to be set aside, 
at least for a little while. I had never been a hospital 
inpatient. I couldn’t see beyond the operation. I was 
scared. But I did keep up my exercises and my swimming, knowing that a fit patient might stand a better 
chance of recovery.
On 10 August I woke up singing my heart out in 
the recovery room at Frenchay Hospital. It was a good 
omen. Much to my surprise, and I think that of my 
family too, I settled into the hospital routine. For five 
days I was required not to move. I had expected this to 
be an ordeal but it wasn’t, largely thanks to the people 
around me. I was a patient patient (“stoical,” said one 
nurse, a word no one had ever used about me), phased 
by morphine, but pathetically and genuinely grateful 
for each cup of tea, each pill, each wash, each visitor, 
each whispered conversation with the night nurse who 
came to turn me in the predawn grey. I owe so much 
to those nurses.
I was in ward 3 of the old (1942) wartime emergency 
hospital, which had been put up quickly next to 
Frenchay Common for North American servicemen. 
I loved the fresh air—windows open all day, and night 
too—and the delicate light flooding each morning and evening through the high, rusty Crittall windows. 
Everything and everybody in the place helped to make 
it easy to be a good patient. I was proud to have been 
born at the time of the NHS, perhaps the most solid 
national achievement of the often depressing 20th 
century. Nothing that I do from now on in my life will 
erase the memories of the unstinting patience and care I 
received at the hands of the staff at Frenchay Hospital.
Within 12 months of the operation the world looked 
a very different place to me. I get occasional aches and 
pains, but what 60 year old doesn’t? I am not in daily, 
constant pain any longer. I am back at work again, as 
busy as ever. I have joined a community choir after a 
lifetime of claiming that I can’t sing. In 2005 I celebrated 
my 60th birthday, surrounded by family and friends. I 
wake every morning—OK, most mornings—feeling that 
I am a lucky man.
As a writer it would have been neat for me to leave 
the story at that happy ending. But real life is not like 
that. The one aspect of my health that has not resolved 
itself is my bladder problem. Since the spring of 2004 I have been on a programme of regular self catheterisation. Over the past two years many of the problems 
relating to my early contacts with the neurology department have recurred. I am a non-urgent case in a urology 
department full of urgent cases. Some tests have been 
quite painful, and the hospital has not been good at 
communicating test results. I try not to let my bladder 
problem interfere with my sense of optimism and wellbeing, but inevitably it does.
The skill and care of individual doctors, nurses, osteopaths, and physiotherapists have given me a quality of 
life I would not have dared to hope for a few years back. 
Yet there are still questions in my mind about how well 
the various parts of the health service actually combine 
with one another. All too often I have felt stranded in a 
medical no man’s land between doctor, hospital departments and clinics, tests, and laboratories, and not least 
my own ignorance of medical matters. At times being a 
good patient has been hard work.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P008
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Kidney dialysis—the need for humanity

From my perspective as a patient, dialysis can appear to lack
imagination and kindness. My kidney failure was diagnosed in
2005. At that time, I was on another journey, one of
indescribable and agonising sadness. My husband was dying.
For many months I cancelled appointments. Eventually I went,
not because of any symptoms but because I thought it best to
find out what I should do. I was 74 and was referred to the low
clearance clinic.
This was a kind and decent set-up with excellent nurses
monitoring the gradual deterioration of people’s kidneys.
Dialysis was never mentioned. Some time later came the first
appointment with the consultant. Now a transplant was
proposed: I was put on the transplant list. I started attending the
low clearance clinic in 2007, and at the end of 2009 the superb
consultant said that dialysis must now begin.
So dialysis began in January 2010. It was particularly
unfortunate that the first thing I passed on my way to the new
dialysis unit was the mortuary: a sad low brick building with
lots of little windows—maybe for the corpses to breathe better.
Then followed a tiring uphill climb to the unit. And when at
last I got there, a closed door greeted me. “Any chance of you
kindly opening it when you arrive at 6.30 am?” I asked one of
the nurses.
“We change into our uniforms, we’ve got all the machines to
get ready, we’ve . . .” “But wait a moment,” I pleaded politely.
“It’s freezing out here in the dark in the winter. We would only
go into the warm waiting room—obviously not into the machine
rooms until we’re allowed. We’d just sit there warmly till
everything was ready.” End of conversation. And how I did hate
having to suggest an idea to “someone higher up.”
Other things were much more complicated to suggest or
complain about. Kindness, thought, imagination—all these should have been the order of the day. But those depended on
the personalities of the nurses and doctors involved. The kidney
consultants and nurses at the hospital before dialysis were mostly
excellent. But the dialysis doctors were from a different
world—both the consultants and the staff who rushed around
keeping an eye on patients’ blood results and general progress.
Fantastic invention that the dialysis machine was, how hard it
must have been for those doctors not to be in an active, positive,
curing role—instead they were watching their patients, immobile
and attached to machines for four or five hours, three times a
week, patients who are hardly over the moon about that. Not
quite true, that last bit: a GP had once told me that one of his
patients who had at last received a transplant actually missed
the jolly camaraderie of it all and the routine of coming for
dialysis.
It is not a good idea to say to a patient, as the dialysis doctor
said, “I’m being very honest. I mean, I’d never have put you on
the transplant list: you’re much too old—you would probably
die on the table. People always think all be fine when they’ve
got that kidney. But indeed not, masses can go wrong.”
“Can you take me off the list?” I inquired gently. “Unfortunately
not. But your consultant could.” My consultant? Yes, he was, I
supposed. It was at my last consultation that he’d said “I see
you have two children.” And I sensed what was coming. “You
know live donors are far better than dead ones,” he said, adding,
“Can you ask them if they would give you a kidney?”
“I gave birth to my children; I nurtured them; I tried with all
that is in me to let them have fulfilled and happy lives. They
might need kidneys for their own children; for their wives or
husbands; they might have accidents that destroy their kidneys.
Do you have children?”
“Yes I do.”
“Then think!”
This conversation was not a good way to embark on a
relationship—but by god I was shocked by his suggestion.
And then there were the masses of other machine people.
Vaguely, one said good mornings into the air on entering the
waiting room. Apart from that, I probably conversed with only
three patients, of different nationalities, all of whom gave me
interesting lectures on the history and politics of their countries.
And now there is a new development: self care, which they try
to foist on everyone. Ghastly for patients to have to think
“dialysis” all the time and struggle with tricky technical
procedures (“leave it to the professionals” we might prefer).
And the end aim—to have our own machine at home. At home
alone, within four walls and with a machine and bags.
There are other things that I could mention. Firstly, I feel we
should be forewarned that eventually we stop passing urine;
happily it hasn’t yet happened to me. But the idea is pretty horrid
physically and psychologically. And secondly, what I call the
first world war scenario. (The students I tutor one to one are
often doing projects on this war: the terrible slaughter, the
trenches.) Anyway, throughout dialysis, patients suddenly appear
with amputations; and very often with heavily bandaged feet,
rapidly followed by crutches and then wheelchairs.
To summarise: dialysis is brilliant, of course, but deeply
horrendous. The people running it must be selected for heart
and intelligence and imagination. Above all, they need heart
and humanity.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P009
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Bilateral developmental dysplasia of the hips

I had just been offered a place on the London Deanery core
surgical training programme, and was half way through
completing my master’s degree in sports and exercise medicine.
I was also training for my first triathlon, having completed a
duathlon the previous year. One night I woke up with groin
pain. After checking myself repeatedly for hernias, I took some
painkillers and managed to get back to sleep. The next morning
I could hardly walk due to pain in my left hip and so hobbled
around for the next couple of days, after which the pain
improved and disappeared. I assumed I had pulled a muscle or
something. I thought nothing more of it until it happened again
about two weeks later, and then again, and again. After the
fourth time I realised that something was not right and I got
some radiographs done. A professor on my course reviewed the
films and immediately told me I had hip dysplasia.
Despite having worked in orthopaedics during my second year
as a junior doctor, I thought this condition was only seen in
babies; my only experience had been when I performed the
Ortolani and Barlow tests as part of new baby checks as a
medical student. If it is missed in childhood, problems can
develop later in life, but I still struggled to get my head round
the fact I had this condition that was going to significantly affect
my ability to walk. From the outset an osteotomy was
mentioned, and I adamantly stated that no-one was going to
break my bones, let alone my pelvis … this was real denial!
One of the benefits of working in the NHS was that I was able
to bypass the usual referral routes and had access to several
opinions from orthopaedic specialists. After the fourth surgeon
had told me I needed a periacetabular osteotomy on my left
hip—a surgical procedure in which the bones of the hip joint
are cut, reorientated, and fixed in a new position—it started to
dawn on me that this was the path I was going to have to take.
During these months the pain had become a permanent feature
and my right hip had also started to hurt, meaning that my
mobility was becoming progressively impaired. In just a few
months I had gone from running 20 kilometres a week to relying
on crutches to walk and being in pain most of the time. The
irony of the orthopaedic senior house officer being on crutches
did not escape my patients either.
Knowing now that I was going to need two lots of major surgery,
each with prolonged recovery and rehabilitation periods, and
potentially lifelong problems with my hips, left me in a state of
despair. I felt that my life was turning upside down. By this
time I had started working at the hospital where I was going to
be treated, and despite having lots of colleagues to talk to about
the condition and the operations, no one could tell me what it
was like to have a pelvic osteotomy and how it was going to
affect my life—I felt very alone.

I discovered a charity, Steps, of which I have since become a
trustee. Through their family contacts, they put me in touch
with other people with developmental dysplasia of the hips. It
was such a relief to be able to talk at last to someone who
understood exactly how scared I was, what it was like living in
pain, and who could answer some of my questions about surgery
and recovery. One of the things that struck me talking to fellow
patients was the length of time and number of visits to different
specialists many people had been through to get an accurate
diagnosis. Although this did not surprise me (having not known
about it myself) it highlighted for me the importance of
recognising the causes of hip pain in young adults.
Most people are apprehensive about being patients, but as a
surgical trainee I had insight into what I was really letting myself
in for, especially when I ended up having to assist my surgeon
doing the operation on someone else. A periacetabular
osteotomy involves the bones around the hip socket being
broken and then realigned to give better coverage of the femoral
head, restoring the biomechanics of the joint to nearly normal
in the process, and reducing the risk of secondary arthritis—joint
preservation surgery. I was relieved to have this option available
to me; the thought of a total hip replacement at the age of 27
years was a frightening prospect, and until recently that was the
only option available to people in my situation.
I am lucky; I have a supportive husband and family. We quickly
realised that this was something we were all going to go through
together. After the operations I was not going to be able to look
after myself, which meant moving out of the flat I share with
my husband and staying with my parents over 70 miles away.
After each operation I was unable to put any weight through
my hip for six weeks and then I gradually built up to walking
with no crutches over the subsequent four weeks. I also used a
wheelchair to go out of the house as it was too tiring and painful
to walk with crutches all the time. The hardest thing was after
the first periacetabular osteotomy, knowing that however much
pain I was in, I was going to have to go through it all again with
the right hip.
I felt extremely vulnerable as a patient, and the complete loss
of independence was something I could not have prepared for.
Relying on others to help you complete the most basic of daily
tasks (washing, dressing), initially from colleagues at work and
then from my husband and parents, was a revelation to say the
least, and it has given me insight into being a patient that I could
never have appreciated before. It was an eye opening experience
using a wheelchair, seeing how differently people treat you, and
just how hard getting around in one can be.
Most orthopaedic surgeons carry out thousands of procedures
in their career, while very few will need one of these procedures done themselves. I wanted to be able to use my experience to
bridge this gap of knowledge. Along with my surgeon, we
arranged a focus group including anaesthetists, pre-assessment
nurses, physiotherapists, and occupational therapists. We invited
five patients who had undergone a periacetabular osteotomy,
including myself, to share their ideas, concerns, and experiences.
The most interesting outcome was the difference between what
the medical team thought would be the most discussed topics
(such as pain and hospital stay), and what the patients actually
felt were the most important factors (such as information before
and after the operation and the rehabilitation period). This
experience has shown me that as physicians, while we think we
know how patients may feel and what they are worried about,
we really don’t. The experience of the focus group was valued
by everyone involved and has led to changes and better provision
of information for patients. A patient focus group with a
multi-disciplinary team input is an excellent way to understand
our patients and the conditions we treat.

Although I still have one small operation on my right hip to
come, I am now getting on with my life with the knowledge
that my hips still have plenty of years left in them. I am enjoying
working and finally getting on with my training, and have even
entered a triathlon for next year. It will be three years since I
last signed up to one, but I know the achievement now is going
to be so much greater.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P010
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: At sixes and sevens: prostate cancer

As the car swung into Swing-Swang Lane, on our final approach to the clinic, I still felt symptomless but had
the eerie knowledge that the next day my abdomen was going to resemble a cage fighter’s and I would be
doped up to the eyeballs. At the age of 53, my prostatic tumour had been diagnosed early, and I had opted
for surgical extirpation.
There are some 34000 new cases in the United Kingdom every year, and it seems everyone from the
Lockerbie bomber to Adrian Mole (aged 39¼) has prostate cancer; it may be the most common internal
malignancy for Western men, but when they break the bad news to you it comes as a complete surprise.
After several years of fluctuating prostate specific antigen values (settling around 6.1 µg/l), and despite two
negative PCA3 urine tests, I finally underwent biopsy needle sampling, the results of which showed that I had
a bulky adenocarcinoma (Gleason score 6-7) at clinical stage T1c. Hearing this was one of my life’s low
points. In Aidy Mole’s phrase, “I felt like a ghost of myself.”
Numbly, I considered the options. I kept perusal of internet mumbo-jumbo to a bare minimum, studied the
helpful National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) website, and was finally convinced by
consultant urologist Christopher Eden that the default option should be interventional surgery, keeping
radiotherapy as a possible back-up. He proposed a laparoscopic radical prostatectomy, and it sounded quite
alarming (I am notably squeamish). The location of the offending gland is most inconvenient—how much
simpler if it were in the left ear lobe—and faced, during the preoperative briefing, with nappies, bags, and
straps, I wondered queasily if I had plumped for the right treatment. Roll on the day when it can be tackled
with a retrovirus vaccine or high intensity focused ultrasound. Perhaps I should have popped into my local
Chinese herbalist for a nice cup of golden lock tea. In the middle of all this, Dr Donald Gleason himself died
in Minnesota, which I found strangely unnerving.
On the appointed day, I trudged towards the anaesthetics room like a Junior Colts batsman going out to face
the first eleven’s demon bowler. “I’m not awfully good with needles or blood,” I confessed to one nurse.
“You’re in the wrong place today, then,” she joked. When I came round, I was supine (certainly not prostrate),
catheterised, and windbound. In my sleep, someone seemed to have punched me five brand new belly
buttons. It was Friday the 13th, and Comic Relief Day, to boot.
The procedure had gone well, and Mr Eden had skilfully even managed to preserve my neurovascular
bundles. I was hugely relieved. Before long, I was coping with my gory thigh bag, shuffling like an oldster
along the corridor (distinctly unathletic in my tracksuit bottoms), and beginning pelvic floor exercises. “Did
anyone mention the risk of swelling,” asked nurse Marie, “of the testicles?” Now they tell me. I longed to go
home, but even so there was a glimmer of Stockholm syndrome when the time came to leave the safety of
the clinic’s facilities.
Back with my family I was cantankerous and exhausted. The home hydraulics of drainage tubes and sponge
baths temporarily distracted me from the long road ahead—an obstacle course combined with snakes and
ladders. I had the usual worries (though drastically new to me): Did they get it all out? Will I ever be continent
again? Have I kissed goodbye to my love life? I made some feeble joke about my career as a porn star
probably being over. My scrotum resembled two purplish figs, and I had chronic constipation. Then, 10 days
later, I returned to the clinic for my decathaterisation, miraculously voided a healthy stream, and was released
to convalesce in the Scottish Highlands.
I was feeling nicely on the mend, when one morning in early April I simply could not pass urine. After phone
advice from down south, we drove for the accident and emergency department in Perth. They had no
urologist, but, at 30 miles away, it was considerably closer than Dundee, and the matter was becoming
urgent. Major road works en route caused an unwelcome blockage of another type, and by the time we
reached the Royal Infirmary my kidneys were aching and I thought I was going to burst. Recatheterised in the
nick of time, it seemed a small clot must have clogged my waterworks. I was gloomy about getting the bag
back, but, as one of the nurses said, I wasn’t about to do much mountain biking anyway.
On 28 May—more than two months after surgery—I suddenly became febrile. For a week I had malarial-style
night sweats, spiking temperatures, and general debility. Like an idiot, I was in denial about these symptoms
because I was determined to go on a trip with my angling club. Soon after, I could ignore the situation no
more, and, fearing I might have caught swine flu (then all the rage), I was admitted to London’s Cromwell
Hospital with “pyrexia of an unknown origin.” Tests ruled out several countryside related possibilities, such as
brucellosis and Lyme disease, but subsequent imaging showed an infected pelvic collection. This was
aspirated percutaneously, antibiotics were applied, the fever disappeared, and I was duly discharged.
That weekend, my temperature again undulated, and topped 105°F (40.55°C) (I possess elderly
thermometers). My new surgeon, Michael Dinneen, admitted me at once to the Chelsea and Westminster
Hospital, a few streets from our house, where a further scan showed ongoing accumulations in what was
probably a retropubic abscess. Another small drain was inserted under local anaesthetic—not much fun—and some gruesome matter, which looked to this layman like rancid yoghurt, was siphoned out.
What with all the blood tests being taken and chemicals being fed through cannulas, I was now cured of my
old squeamishness, but we were baffled by what was going on in my nether regions. My already weakened
bladder, continually being topped up before scans, was also seriously confused. Antibiotics weren’t really
working, so Mr Dinneen presented the option of drainage by open surgery—no fun at all—but this was now
beyond a joke.
When he went in, he found “an extremely thick walled indurated collection of dead purulent matter,” a deeply
embedded lymphocele the like of which he had rarely encountered. It proved obdurate, and required “a
difficult and complicated operation.” When I came round this time I had a stapled wound six inches wide
(there goes my bikini line) and yet another urethral catheter. Talk about snakes and ladders. For a fortnight I
lay there, enervated, demoralised, and altogether mystified. My second convalescence was slow, and by the
time I was allowed to take a bath again I had even forgotten the automatic routine for drying myself.
The wound culture showed carboxyphilic streptococcus, but no one seemed to know the cause of the
complication—my own guess is that the obstruction I had while in Scotland must have caused a tiny leak of
urine through the mending tissue, which infected the fluid in my abdominal cavity. When I described all this in
an email to an American friend, he merely responded, “Yikes!” I think that just about sums it up.
Given its physiological “zip code,” prostate surgery is quite a big ask of the human body. I still experience
occasional enuresis, and I continue to be ably supported by vardenafil, but in retrospect I would say that the
side effects are a worthwhile swap for the cancer. Recent trips down Swing-Swang Lane have indicated that
I have not had any biochemical relapses, and my final histology showed only Gleason grade 6s—so I remain
hopeful. Right now, whenever I am told the results of a prostate specific antigen test, my favourite word in
the English language, definitely, is: “unrecordable.”
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P011
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Duchenne muscular dystrophy

I was diagnosed with Duchenne muscular dystrophy at the age of 3. My parents were always honest about
my disease, but I didn’t really care much about it. As the progression was slow, I gradually began to
understand its impact, including the physical restrictions. I’m now severely disabled and have lived much
longer than the doctors expected. The loss of opportunities open to me, combined with the fact that I’m still
alive, evokes many mixed feelings.

I moved into a residential home when I was about 20 years old. This wasn’t easy. I had to get used to being
helped by a succession of professionals. Until then, my mother had been my only carer. The move was also
difficult for my mum. She had to trust new, unknown, professional caregivers. It was hard for me, too, since I
love my mum and I want her to be happy.

I have to adjust repeatedly to changing reality. I used to play wheelchair hockey, but I’m not able to do that
any more. I cannot go out without help. My ideas and preferences have also changed. Initially, for example, I
resisted when the doctors said I needed artificial respiration during the night. I accepted this for night time,
but didn’t want a cannula 24 hours a day. With a cannula I would be totally dependent on others. But when
eventually I actually needed respiration 24 hours a day, I agreed. It scared me and at that moment I wished I
was dead. It was an enormous step, but my feelings changed over the time. Still, it is hard, every time a new
problem occurs. I need some time to get adjusted to the changes, and medical specialists sometimes go too fast. The
operation of the cannula was planned three weeks after the decision, which gave me some time to adjust—
but then I was asked to undergo it earlier. Medically that was probably a good decision, but for me it was too
sudden. I was upset and thought about cancelling the operation. Afterwards I was happy with the change,
but not knowing what’s going to happen is scary.

For me, the fear and dependency is the worst. I am totally dependent on others and can’t do anything at all.
Were something to go wrong with the cannula, I would be able to survive for only three minutes without
artificial respiration, then I would die.
An automatic alarm is set to go off in case of an emergency, or I can use the alarm system myself. It frightens
me—does it work? Will the caregivers be in time? Sometimes, the plug for the alarm bell comes out for a little
during the night. I can’t use it if this happens, since I’m not able to put it back, so I have to scream. I’m afraid
there may come a time when they don’t hear me.
Artificial respiration restricts me. I can’t go out alone, I need somebody to help me in an emergency and to
drain off the mucus in my trachea.
Some people with artificial respiration go outside without other people. They ask a passer-by in case of an
emergency or if they need help. I don’t do that since I don’t want to be troublesome and I don’t want to take
risks. I want somebody to go with me who knows how to respond properly if necessary.
I do not want to be troublesome in my home. I try to remember the answers to my questions and ask for help
if I have more questions. Sometimes I lie uncomfortable in bed for hours, because I don’t want to call for
help. This is not satisfactory either.

My religion really helps me. I’m not angry because of my disease but I’m disappointed if things go wrong. I
realise that the Lord will support me always. Maybe not immediately, but later on. I realise that He was with
me in these difficult moments.
Of course, I wish I could recover, but that does not appear to be a possibility. People in church pray for me
and for my recovery. I think it’s really sweet, but for me my disease also has a meaning. It’s not senseless,
since I’m now able to show people how privileged they are. My body tells them that being healthy isn’t
something to be taken for granted.
I think we should realise that we are all vulnerable. People have to know that they could be disabled the next
day without warning. My disease can motivate people to create a good life, to make them realise that life isn’t
always easy.

I have many friends, and they and my family are important to me. Other people sometimes have problems
with handling my disability. Because of this, they avoid talking with me and find it difficult to gauge my mood
and situation.
Often I don’t want to talk about my disease or express my feelings. I keep my fears, doubts, and questions to
myself as I don’t want to make people feel sad. I want it to be cosy. Sometimes this sense of responsibility is
tiresome. Then I can’t let it go, which leads to lying awake, thinking about it, at night, and makes me feel sad
and angry.

I would like to have a wife, but then I also would long for children, and having children is impossible. I
wouldn’t be able to handle situations like being unable to hold my child or for us to play together.
I think my wife shouldn’t have to be responsible for the children and me, and to know that she would end her
life alone, without me. That makes me sad. And because of this, I don’t want to marry. But I do have some
sexual needs and I don’t know what my religion allows. If I watch a movie, I feel guilty and sad afterwards. My
religion supports me, but during these moments it’s difficult. Also, it’s hard seeing friends and family getting
married and having children, and realising that I will die without such things.

My days are long and I’m at home most of the time. It’s boring. I watch some DVDs and I surf the internet. I
read in the Bible and think about my life and what’s going on in the world. I would like to go to a day activity
centre again. This is only possible with a wheelchair taxi and in company with a skilled person. Unfortunately
that’s expensive. We’ve had some activities in the living room of our home, which was great. At the moment,
the ground floor is being rebuilt to create a real day activity centre. I’m looking forward to visiting it and
meeting other people.

I try to enjoy life as much as possible, but for the last few years I have been thinking more and more about
the fact that I’ll die early. It makes me sad. I have already lived longer than everybody expected when I was
born.
I’m scared about the future and about dying, so I try to focus on the nice things in the future. And even if it’s
hard, you have to go on. Sometimes I wish it could be all over, but at such times I can always find a bright
spot again.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P012
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Sir Karl Popper, swans, and the general practitioner

What is truth? And what is truth in the encounter between a
patient and a general physician? Is truth always determined
either from the “observer” or the “patient’s” perspective and
thus subjective? Or does something like objective truth exist?
During my journey as a patient I experienced pain and emotional
suffering. I did not worry about philosophical questionsrelating
to truth in general or truth as it applies to medicine and the
medical encounter. Questions relevant for the philosophy of
science seem to be far removed from the sickbed and the
delivery of professional medical care and treatment. But are
they?
The most difficult part of my journey through the medical
system was the entry. As a 50 year old I already had a history
of low back pain. Around the time of my 50th birthday the pain
increased. This was a reason to consult my general practitioner
(GP). Quickly, and without physical examination, she was
convinced that there was no reason to worry. She knew I was
a busy academic who had a stressful working life with my
research and teaching. Her advice wasto try to reduce the stress
as much as possible by not working too hard (in my patient file
she noted: “functional, non-specific low back pain resulting
from work stress”). Her advice didn’t help. On the contrary, the
back pain increased and a month later I consulted her again.
This time she prescribed pain medication. This was of no avail
either. I returned to see her again some weeks later and asked
her to refer me for radiography. She was very reluctant to do
this and explained the “dangers” of radiation. Only after much
pressure did she agree. The radiographs of the lower parts of
my back didn’tshow any major aberrations, although there were
some minor abnormalities at the vertebrae. My GP seemed
content to see these peculiarities as the possible (probable)
causes of my pain. Nevertheless, my situation kept worsening.
During the long nights I experienced severe pain; I would lie
in bed in a separate room, howling like a wolf (as my wife said)
and having involuntary contractions of my legs. It became more
and more difficult to stand up and walk, and I lost the ability to
stay upright.
In the Dutch healthcare system the GP has a gatekeeping role.
This makes it difficult for patients to access specialised
healthcare services without a referral from their GP. In my case
my GP refused to refer me to a neurologist. As my medical
condition kept worsening, I decided to make an appointment
for a consultation with a neurologist in Belgium (where patients
have the freedom to contact specialised healthcare staff
independently). When I confronted my GP about this,she noted
in my patient file: “It’s the patient’s wish, so be it. . .”
Ultimately, this neurologist referred me to the neurosurgery
department, where an assistant decided to do magnetic resonance
imaging of the whole of my back (not just the lower parts).
These scansshowed that canceroustissue, which was all around
my lungs and belly, was already pressing on my spinal cord.
This explained the progressive and extreme pain I had been
experiencing. Chemotherapy and autologous stem cell
transplantation were successful.
Ten months had passed between my first encounter with my
GP and the final diagnosis of non-Hodgkin lymphoma and it
was only because a thoughtful neurosurgery assistant was willing
to look beyond the lower back (on which the GP had focused)
that the cancerous tissue became visible and the truth was
revealed. I crossed the threshold and my journey as a cancer
patient eventually started.
So what about the truth? Does it matter? Yes, it does. Looking
back at my entry into the medical system, I came to realise the
importance, indeed the lifesaving, potential of the work of the
philosopher of science Sir Karl Popper. In particular, his views
on truth are very relevant for medicine and GP’s. My GP’s wayof approaching the truth would be abhorrent to Popper. By
searching for confirmation of her initial diagnosis she found
nothing but a truth that was already there. As Popper would say,
if you suppose all swans are white, you will not find any swans
than white swans. Popper’s revolutionary insight was that you
should, in fact, be searching for black swans. Only then will it
be possible to gain better knowledge about the world and what
happensin it. Thisso called falsification principle has had great
impact on the philosophy of science and the way in which
empirical scientific knowledge is achieved. Briefly, it involves
the formulation of testable hypotheses(that is, predictions about
what is the matter or what will happen) and the intention to
falsify these expectations. Do not try to look for white swans,
but instead look for black swans. Only this way, in Popper’s
view, can the truth be approached.
Subjectively, I think the course set by my GP (and continued
by several of my specialists who based their actions on the
information given by her) might have had serious if not fatal
consequences for my health and existence. This is obviously an
observation I cannot confirm or falsify but nevertheless does
not seem unreasonable.
Doctors, and in particular GP’s, should always bear in mind the
fallibility of their assumptions. This is the central message Karl
Popper has for the daily practice of medicine. When I typed
“falsification+principle+medical +diagnosis” into Google it
showed 223 000 hits, but only a few bits of information were
usable. One relevant piece was the Wikipedia entry
“Confirmation bias”, which stated: “Confirmation bias(also called confirmatory
bias or myside bias) is a tendency for people to favor
information that confirms their preconceptions or hypotheses
regardless of whether the information istrue. As a result, people
gather evidence and recall information from memory selectively,
and interpret it in a biased way. The biases appear in particular
for emotionally significant issues and for established beliefs.”
And with regards to physical and mental health Wikipedia
stated: “Raymond Nickerson, a psychologist, blames
confirmation bias for the ineffective medical procedures that
were used for centuries before the arrival of scientific medicine.
If a patient recovered, medical authorities counted the treatment
as successful, rather than looking for alternative explanations
such as that the disease had run its natural course.” I found no
linksto information on confirmation bias with regardsto medical
diagnosis, treatment, or general physicians.
At no point during the process was my GP willing to reconsider
her initial diagnosis, although my situation was progressively
worsening and becoming unbearable. She was, and stayed,
convinced that her truth was the truth—that I had “aspecific
low back pain,”—and this preconception kept her away from
considering any contrary evidence that would refute this
preconception. She didn’t look for black swans, all she saw
were white swans.
My hypothesis is that in medical schools and education no, or
insufficient, attention is being given to the philosophy ofscience
in general, and Popper’s theory in particular. Now it’s time to
try to refute this hypothesis, and make real progress in daily
medical practice, for the sake of patients with complaints that
appear to be clear, obvious, undeniable and easy to explain, but
are not. This requires a transformation in the mindset of GP’s
and a fundamental willingness to try not to look for support for
their convictions, but to search instead for alternative
explanations for the complaints of patients.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P013
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Heart transplant

I was 28 years old and led a somewhat unexciting, single life in London. I had been feeling breathless for a
couple of weeks leading up to Ed’s stag weekend in September 2002. As a non-smoker I was not too
worried, and my doctor reassured me there was nothing wrong. At the stag weekend I braved the karting
activities, but as the day wore on I laboured with my breathing, and by the evening I struggled to climb a
single flight of stairs. Despite his inebriated state, Ed was worried. It certainly helped that he and several
other attendees at the weekend were doctors.
The next morning, surrounded by doctors with hangovers, I had a chest radiograph. A few days later, on
Friday 13, I attended a clinic at the Royal Brompton Hospital. After echocardiography had clearly shown
something was amiss, I was admitted with heart failure. On reflection it is strange that on being told I had
heart failure I didn’t really react. I was more thankful that the doctors had found a cause for my
breathlessness and that it wasn’t cancer. I was initially told I would be out of hospital for the wedding, but I
then had a minor heart attack. I remember this happening although the events immediately after it are a little
blurred. I remember not being able breathe very well; it almost felt like I was suffocating. I reached for the
nurse’s bell, managed to hit it, and that was the last thing I remember.
I woke up six days later in the intensive care unit. I had two large tubes coming out of my chest, feeding into
the left ventricular assist device. It didn’t faze me at all; I was more confused about the fact that to my mind
yesterday had been Friday and today was now Thursday. Although my blood was now being pumped by a
huge machine because my heart was no longer strong enough this didn’t particularly trouble me, but a few
things did: first was the continuous positive airway pressure machine blasting freezing cold air down my
throat. This would have been uncomfortable enough but was made infinitely worse by the tube that I had
going up my nose to feed me, which was breaking the mask seal, resulting in freezing cold air being directed
straight into my right eye. I tried my hardest to explain this to the nurses, but my oral skills were somewhat
lacking.
I remember trying to communicate with my parents in those first few days. My mind knew what I wanted to
say, but when I tried to speak the words just wouldn’t come. I tried to write things down, but spelling and
letters also failed me. I just couldn’t remember how to communicate. This caused huge frustration, and tired
me out very quickly. During this time I never contemplated further than the next hour; the future didn’t seem
to matter, nor even cross my mind.
Within a week I was strong enough to be moved on to a much smaller and mobile left ventricular assist
device, and I was moved to Harefield Hospital, where I was told that the device would allow my heart to rest
and potentially get better. It was described to me as a bridge to recovery. There was never any suggestion
that things would go any other way. But after three weeks a consultant came to see me to tell me that I
needed a heart transplant. My first reaction was anger, and then came frustration. I decided the doctors were
giving up on saving my heart and opting just to replace it. I felt three weeks wasn’t long enough for my heart
to have recovered, and that they should give it another few weeks. However, with help and support from my
friends and family I soon realised that this course of action had not been taken lightly.
So having taken the weekend to contemplate that I could not live on the machine forever I decided that a
transplant was my best option and gave my consent. Unbelievably, the next day a very excited transplant
coordinator came racing into my room telling me they had a heart for me. Within five days I was in the gym
and feeling like a new man. After my transplant I realised how easy everyday tasks now were, and it dawned
on me that I had made precisely the right decision.
Along with a new heart comes a new sense of optimism for life, a second chance, and a whole new regimen
for life, in particular a lot more pills to take. This small change to my life was probably the most difficult to
incorporate, which sounds ridiculous, as I had just had one of my major organs replaced. The most
challenging time was the first six months because the drugs and their dosage changed on a weekly basis.
But around the first year mark the drug regimen settled down and has remained constant ever since. As with
any new routine, it takes a few months to get used to, but then it is as subliminal as cleaning your teeth.
The first three months after the transplant were a hectic learning curve. During this period of weekly hospital
reviews, remembering what pills to take and when, coupled with a ban on mixing with the outside world, I
had a lot of time for inward reflection. I realised how things could have turned out very differently: if my friend
hadn’t made it possible for me to attend the initial clinic; if my friends and family hadn’t been there to support
me in my decision to opt for the transplant; if medical support and ability hadn’t been there to keep me alive
long enough for the operation; and, of course, if the donor heart hadn’t been available. I have a lot to be
thankful for, and with this comes a sense of responsibility, a responsibility to lead a long and healthy life. I felt
indebted to these people. It was during this period that I realised that going for a few tests to make sure I’m
in tip top condition and remembering to take pills twice a day was not a big ask in return.
After my three months’ enforced isolation, I started to reintroduce myself to normal life. I thought I could just
pick up where I left off. My consultant had told me that it would take me a year to return to being fully fit.
Initially I did not believe him. But four months in I tried to run for a bus, and at the point where I started
running I fell flat on my face. My legs gave way, my heart was pounding, and I lay there thinking maybe this
would take a year. But I was back at full time work within five months, and the more I got back into my usual
routine, the less I felt like anything had happened.
I am now married to a surgeon and live a normal life. The only time I remember that I have had a transplant is
when I need to go for my six monthly check up. I believe this is because my friends and family treat me no
differently from how they always have. They certainly do not let me use my transplant as an excuse to avoid
the rigours of life.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P014
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Living with obstetric fistula

When we arrived at the clinic I was just at the beginning of
labour. I stayed there for a day and the pain kept increasing.
One of the nurses asked me to push so as to increase the labour.
I continued pushing with no sign of delivery. The next day a
doctor came and told me that the labour was not progressing.
He said I should be induced so that I could deliver.
There was no sign of delivery except the kicking of the baby in
my womb. During my third day at the hospital the nurse on duty
heard me screaming because of the terrible pain. She said “You
are the only one giving us a problem and it is because you are
so lazy. It is as if you are not a woman. Can’t you see all the
other mothers have delivered and gone home with their babies?”
She told me to stand up and start going up and down. The nurse
said that moving this way might help me to deliver. I started
doing as she said and then something burst out of me. Black
water started trickling down my legs. She said “Maybe now
you are going to deliver.” For over 30 minutes I was pushing
on the bed but nothing progressed. On the fourth day when I
felt like urinating nothing came out, only blood. By now I
couldn’t walk, my legs were very heavy as if they were frozen.
On the sixth day I started losing consciousness and my mother
was terrified that I might not survive. My parents asked the
management staff to refer me to a better hospital where I could
have a caesarean section. By then we knew the baby was already
dead because the heartbeat could not be felt. I went by bus to
the next hospital. We were lucky to find a doctor there who was
very sympathetic. She asked my relatives how they could leave
me in this condition.
I was not aware that I had developed a fistula until after the
caesarean. I was brought to the postoperative care unit with a
catheter. Afterseven days, the catheter wasremoved and I found
myself lying in a stream of water. I wasshocked when I realised
that I could not control my bladder as I had before. My mother
saw me and asked why I had poured water on my bed. I told
her it was not water and that it felt like urine was coming out
uncontrolled. One of the nursessaid it was vesicovaginal fistula.
My mother screamed and I started crying. I knew it was
something terrible because one of our neighbours has
vesicovaginal fistula. My neighbour’s husband rejected her and
her relations left her; her baby was stillborn, and she never had
another child because no other men would marry her. She
became destitute and had to beg on the street, right into old age.
The diagnosis affected me seriously and Istarted thinking about
the future. My hope was that I should recover and catch up with
my colleagues who had started registering for their second year
at university. I wondered how I could go back to university in
this condition? How could I mix with my classmates with urine
trickling down legs that don’t work? I cried in silence in the
dark, because I was left behind, my dignity had gone, and I
didn’t know when my problem could be solved. The healthcare
staff referred me to the fistula unit in the Murtala Specialist
Hospital at Kano.

The doctor said I had two different and difficult fistula
complications, a vesicovaginal fistula and a rectovaginal fistula.
I also had paralysed nerves in my legs (drop foot), which meant
a lot of damage had been done during labour. The surgery
needed to be done by an experienced European surgeon who
was coming in two weeks’ time. The healthcare staff said that
the specialist was always willing to do the work, and wanted to
help solve our problems. I was happy to hear that the doctor
was so dedicated and sympathetic.
After that the days were long and alwaysthe same. My mattress
was always wet, with urine all over. In cold weather urine would
penetrate down the mat and flow under my bed. My mother (I
call her Hajiya) would make sure my bed was always dry by
using large towels and a macintosh as if making a baby’s bed.
That would help me to sleep well. Without this, urine would disturb me at night and cause rashes and other infections on my
skin.
I looked very thin and anaemic. I always passed everything I
ate so I limited the amount of food I took.
Hajiya was always telling me to go out and stretch my legs. But
I told her I didn’t want to, because the pain in my legs became
intense and I moved slowly because of my drop foot. In the
middle of the night I could not sleep. My eyes were open,
turning from one side to the other until morning. If Hajiya forced
me to go out I would start crying.
Whenever I did go out I saw girls and women everywhere with
wet, urine-soaked clothing who were overcome with sorrow
and poverty, this touched my heart and made it beat fast. And
every day new women with fistulas came to the medical centre,
most of them from poor villages with little education. Some of
them had had fistula for ten to 12 years and their ambition in
life, their focus, was alwaysto be cured and to be normal. Some
had been cured but came again with one, two, three, or more
fistulas after bearing more children because there was no one
to deliver their babies properly. These women slept and lived
under a tree in the fistula compound. They hung their property
on the tree trunk, and put their bags under the tree. And in order
to eat, to get clothes and a nappy to trap the urine, to survive
and to maintain their pride, they went out begging, day and
night. It was terrible, and I wondered why women were being
injured like this every day.
When the surgeon arrived, he investigated me and told me there
was a lot of damage to my body and that, before the repair could
be made, I needed to eat more fish and chicken with green
vegetables to make myself healthy.
I had several surgeries because the sphincters that controlled
my urine and bowels were lost due to trauma so I was
incontinent. So far I have had surgery four times and I am still
not healed because of the extreme nature of my fistulas. I am
still waiting for the next stage, which I hope will be the last, but
I am not sure when to go for that surgery, although my surgeon
is always willing to assist. I feel good whenever I think of my
surgeon. He always caresfor my condition; he has always given
me treatment whenever the need has arisen. But I am traumatised
by having had a fistula at the age of 25, and by losing my status
as a mother, wife, and university graduate for ten years. And it
takes courage to face more painful surgery with no guarantee.
Now I am searching for whatever might lead me to a better life
and a better future. Because fistula is stressful you have to be
strong or you could end up losing your whole life.
My family never rejected me. They continue to support me and
encourage me to be strong. At first my husband loved and cared
for me, but after I developed this problem he stopped everything
he had been doing for me, seeing me as being of no use. I have
been staying with my parents for the past 10 years. I am now
divorced.
I have not given birth again and, in a society in which children
are very important to every woman of child-bearing age that is
very damaging to my pride. This is the most distressing aspect
of my condition. I am always hoping for the day when I will
heal and have a way of giving birth to a child again.
What has really made a difference is my level of education. If
I was uneducated, like most women with fistula, the
stigmatisation would be worse. Before my fistula I didn’t even
know what a non-governmental organisation was, but I have
now learnt a lot about how to be an advocate for people with
reproductive health problems and to mobilise them. I have learnt
that fistula is a condition that is almost entirely preventable with
timely medical intervention. It can be caused by bad service
delivery in the medical world and thus negligence. I know that
I am in the same position as any other woman with fistula, no
matter what my educational background. I therefore have to
join hands with the poorest women in the world, to prevent
fistula and to help my sisters with fistula to fight for their dignity
and rehabilitation. And we must do that, or the trauma of
vesicovaginal fistula will continue to affect the lives of
thousands of good mothers of childbearing age.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P015
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Joint hypermobility syndrome

Chronic pain, frequent soft tissue trauma, and exhaustion compelled a keen recreational ballet dancer to give
up classes and work
On reflection, I should have realised that I was either a little bit different or had some remarkable powers of
flexibility. It is perhaps unusual to be able to put your legs behind your neck or to put both hands flat on the
floor without warming up first. As a teenager I was told that I had “swayback knees,” but I just got on with my
life at the time, which was then (and remains) very ballet orientated. Not perhaps a wholly unexpected choice
of activity for someone with an above average level of joint mobility; indeed, there is a high prevalence of
hypermobility in the ballet world because of the desirable aesthetic qualities of hypermobile limbs. However, I
had no idea that behind the beauty of my extensions lay immense pain and fatigue.
There is a difference between having hypermobile joints, which might be classified as generalised joint
hypermobility and is asymptomatic, and the joint hypermobility syndrome, which has symptoms. My
symptoms started when I was 17 years old (I am now 35), and I started to get pain in my lumbar spine. I had
physiotherapy for an inflamed sacroiliac joint, but the pain became more established and painful over time. I
had many years of back pain, which eventually became disruptive, and I gave up ballet classes in 1999 and
even stopped work for six months in 2001 (aged 24). Magnetic resonance imaging showed a disc prolapse
and degeneration at L4/5. Whenever I was referred to physiotherapists and osteopaths over those years,
they used to ridicule my spine and say that it “looked” horrendous in terms of my range of movement and
were often extremely unhelpful. Only one physiotherapist looked at giving me any core stability work to try to
stabilise what is now described as a hinging at that level of the spine.
I attended a pain management course in a well known London hospital in the autumn of 2006, where they apparently knew I was hypermobile but did not look at all the symptoms that I was experiencing and piece
things together. Unfortunately, joint hypermobility syndrome is a difficult condition to diagnose and only one
in 20 people with the condition are given the correct diagnosis.
The clues to my diagnosis began two years ago. I had restarted ballet classes gradually in 2007 and by early
2008 was doing four classes a week; I was probably doing too much too soon, and not sensibly pacing my
activity. As a result I partially tore my right calf. After some physiotherapy, I was discharged as soon as I was
able to walk again. When I was dancing again I realised it was still not right, and decided to see a dance
specialist physiotherapist at Laban Health in southeast London.
My physiotherapist initially gave me some rehabilitation exercises for the area of concern but soon realised
that most of my problems were due to gross instability caused by my (many) hypermobile joints and that I
was going to need extensive strengthening and core stability work. I am still nowhere near being “fixed,” but I
have come a considerable way since then (the journey can be seen in my blog,
www.danceinjuryrecovery.blogspot.com). It has taken immense determination to put my body back together,
and if it wasn’t for the huge improvements in functioning and movement, and the payback of improved
performance in class, I would have given up long ago.
After treating me for about six months my physiotherapist did some hands-on work on me and realised that
my tissue response was somewhat unusual. For example, she might treat one area (the right hip, say), move
to another area, then return to the starting point and find my tissues had gone back to where they were—
therefore progress was seemingly nil. At the same time I was having considerable trouble with fatigue, not for
the first time in my life. I was regularly feeling “run over” and disproportionately exhausted. It was at this point
that my physiotherapist thought that I might not just be hypermobile, but have joint hypermobility syndrome.
My history of chronic pain and frequent soft tissue trauma made this diagnosis more likely. Also, I had been a
very late walker, had not crawled, and had night cramps and growing pains, including problems with motor
control (my coordination was and still is very poor); these are all indicative of the syndrome.
Joint hypermobility syndrome is formally diagnosed, often by using the Beighton score and the Brighton
criteria (boxes 1 and 2). The Brighton criteria differentiate the hypermobile patient from the one who has the
syndrome, because of positive responses to joint pain and signs indicative of faulty collagen—for example,
skin extensibility, prolapses, and varicose veins. My over-riding message to the medical profession would be
to “think outside the box” in the case of a patient who regularly presents with joint pain and injuries. I believe
that some of my injuries and traumas could have been prevented if I had been diagnosed when much
younger and been given the appropriate remedial strengthening and stability work from the outset.

Joint hypermobility syndrome is an invisible condition, but it is hard work controlling limbs that have such an
extra range of movement. Indeed, I am lucky that I have not subluxated or dislocated any joints, as this is a
regular problem for many patients with joint hypermobility syndrome. Pain and fatigue are a large part of this
condition, but the range of symptoms is wider. For example, irritable bowel syndrome and asthma are related
to the syndrome because it is a connective tissue disorder and the problems stem from having abnormally
stretchy collagen fibres, as I understand it. Given that the guts and lungs are stretchy tissues in themselves,
one can perhaps begin to understand the repercussions of faulty connective tissues.
On the whole, people are not sympathetic to the condition, and I have lost relationships because of being in
pain so often. Even friendships have suffered because I have often been so exhausted at the end of a
working day that I had no reserves for going out and socialising. I suppose that because I look healthy and
well and I dance, people dismiss my symptoms. Sometimes it gets hard to deflect people’s lack of sympathy
and negative comments. Talking to other patients—for example, via the Hypermobility Syndrome Association
forum (see box 3)—can be supportive and helpful.
I am one of the lucky ones. I have a wonderful physiotherapist who is incredibly supportive and who has
really helped me. My body has changed beyond all recognition over the past two years. With the help of
regular pilates sessions and ongoing physiotherapy, I am still managing to do ballet classes. I will probably
have to do remedial exercises for the rest of my life, but at last I am starting to have some sense of control
over my body, compared with the chaos of the past. I have a mission to ensure that others with the condition
are helped. Since completing my MSc in Dance Science, I have been researching the condition and am now
writing a patient led book on joint hypermobility syndrome, to be published in mid-2011.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P016
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Non-coeliac gluten sensitivity

The summer of 1991 was when my problems really began. I
had had a severe bout of sickness and diarrhoea on holiday in
Corfu. I recovered from the gut infection after I came back from
holiday, but my general health continued to deteriorate over the
next six to 12 months.
Then followed two decades of unexplained ill health with
multiple symptoms including weakness, exhaustion, bloating,
nausea, indigestion, diarrhoea, skin rashes, ingrown hairs,
cracked skin, joint and muscle pain, anal leakage of undigested
fat, oscillating body weight, numbness in my feet and hands,
muscle spasms in my legs (especially at night), mood swings,
mild depression, and disturbed sleep patterns. These symptoms
fluctuated day to day, but the worst by far was a constant intense
bladder pain that was eventually diagnosed as incurable and
untreatable interstitial cystitis.
My interstitial cystitis has been examined by biopsy, and I have
undergone many many other urinary tests over 10–15 years,
including passing a camera into my bladder and inflating the
bladder with fluid to watch for the classic “bleed” from the
bladder wall when it is distended. My eventual diagnosis in
Oxford was by a consultant in genitourinary medicine who
specialises in interstitial cystitis and was a diagnosis of exclusion
after all other possibilities had been eliminated. Diagnosis by
exclusion is the norm for interstitial cystitis.
I received drug treatment for the interstitial cystitis, but my
symptoms did not improve until I excluded gluten and lactose.
They are now much better but not entirely eliminated. I
eventually gave up my career, and, without the unfailing support
of my wife, it would have ruined my life.
I now know that all of these symptoms stem from an intolerance
or sensitivity to gluten that does not manifest itself as classic
coeliac disease but which still causes many of the same bowel
symptoms and can trigger other autoimmune conditions such
as arthritis, interstitial cystitis, and neurological conditions
(including pins and needles and numbness). Over the next 20
years, I repeatedly told medical professionals that my bladder
pain was always much worse when my bowel symptoms were
particularly bad and that the two must be linked. Most
importantly, I felt strongly that it was caused by something I
was eating. In particular, I had noticed that when I had either
starved myself for 24 hours or undergone a bowel cleanse before
a medical procedure my symptoms seemed to disappear or were
much reduced.
Medical professionals seemed mystified or dismissive and had
no explanation. I well remember being told by one consultant
that there was nothing that could link bowel symptoms to
bladder symptoms or any other symptom I had. Another young
consultant told me that people with symptoms like mine often
commit suicide. I’m fairly sure he wasn’t suggesting it as a
treatment option, but I certainly did feel very down about my
condition.
Eventually, after about a decade, I gave up seeking a cure or
diagnosis of my illness. I tried to live life as best and as fully
as I could. By now I had two young children, and I tried to focus
on the positives and counted my blessings. However, in
Christmas 2006 I had a severe bout of biliary colic and
eventually had my gall bladder removed (yet another condition
I now know may be linked to gluten sensitivity), but my health
continued to deteriorate after the operation.
By summer 2008, I was unable to walk up a hill and was
gradually becoming house bound. The internet became an
important link to the outside world, and I began a desperate
search for some clue as to what was wrong with me. A chance
conversation in a chat room forum with someone who had had
exactly my symptoms and the suggestion that I try excluding
gluten (and lactose) from my diet was how I eventually reached
my own initial self diagnosis. The results were dramatic. Within
a week of excluding gluten and lactose from my diet, all my
symptoms had dramatically improved in just the same way as
when I previously starved myself. I wasn’t starving myself now
though, I was just not eating gluten and lactose. I felt better and
had more energy than I had in decades.
I went to see the consultant who had carried out the gall bladder
operation and excitedly told him about my discovery that gluten
and lactose were the source of all my health problems and how
dramatic had been the results of excluding them from my diet
even after a few weeks. He seemed quite uninterested but told
me to carry on with the gluten and lactose exclusion diet “if you
find it is working for you.”
After experimenting with my diet, I have found that I react
severely to even small traces of both gluten and lactose.
Accidental exposure to either of them brings all my symptoms
back in a matter of hours, and the symptoms take several days
to subside again. I can almost always identify the source of the
accidental exposure, and it happens very rarely now as my
experience and knowledge of my condition and food ingredients
have increased.
Despite the success with my exclusion diet, it wasn’t until early
2012 that I finally got a proper diagnosis of my condition. After
a chance internet search, I found medical research papers on
gluten sensitivity and intolerance written by Dr Kamran
Rostami. I have a degree in biochemistry, and those papers were
a revelation. From my own personal experience and from the
point of view of my training as a scientist, his papers made
complete sense of everything that I had experienced. I had no
idea that there was such a large and growing body of people
expressing a wide spectrum of symptoms that seem to be linked
to gluten intolerance and sensitivity but who did not exhibit
classic coeliac disease. Like me, many of them had remained
undiagnosed for years.
I immediately asked my GP to get me an appointment with Dr
Rostami, who, unbeknown to me, was working just a few miles
away in my local hospital. Before Dr Rostami, no medical
professional had ever said the word “gluten” to me over the
entire 20 years of my ill health. However, I don’t feel bitter
about the medical practitioners who failed to diagnose my health
problems. Each was highly skilled in his or her own specialty,
but nobody was looking at the whole picture. A specialist in
chronic bladder pain is not a specialist in gastrointestinal
medicine.
As a result of my conversations with Dr Rostami, I strongly
suspect that my problems with gluten really began long before
1991 and that the gut infection I had on holiday was simply a
trigger that made my gut more permeable to gluten (and lactose)
and eventually caused the emergence of more severe symptoms.
Looking back, it is clear to me that I exhibited early signs of
gluten intolerance and sensitivity in my childhood. I weighed
under 6 stone (38 kg) when I was 12 years old. In 1991 I
weighed about 11 st 7 lb (73 kg), but after my symptoms started,
my weight fell to under 11 st (70 kg) and I felt very weak. Then
my weight ballooned up to 13 st 7 lb (86 kg) after my gall
bladder was removed in 2008. Finally, after I had excluded
gluten, it fell to 11 st 4 lb over a few months, where it remains
today. To be honest, the most important issue with my weight
is that it can easily rise 4-7 lb (2-3 kg) overnight if I accidentally
eat gluten, as I fill up with fluid when my immune system goes
into overdrive.
I had mild depression throughout my teenage years, was small
and underweight, and went through puberty later than the other
boys in my class at school. I also used to gorge on bread, cakes,
and biscuits, but I was always thin despite the thousands of
calories I was eating. I have read that it is common for people
to be addicted to the foodstuff that does them most harm. That
was certainly true in my case. Paradoxically, as the son of a
farmer and growing up on a farm, I used to help my father grow
wheat, and he was paid a higher price by merchants if he could
grow wheat with high levels of gluten for bread and biscuit
making. Like my father, I used to chew the wheat grains at
harvest time to check for hardness as we decided when to harvest
the crop. Every year I got itchy bleeding rashes on my ankles
and elbows that went away as soon as harvest finished. Now I
know why.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P017
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Lymphoma

Two years ago, standing in front of the bathroom mirror, I
noticed that I had a right inguinal swelling. Palpation showed
it to be a rubbery, mobile mass, 2.5 cm in diameter. Examining
more generally, I found that I had bilateral inguinal adenopathy,
the contralateral glands being only 1 cm in diameter. I was
unable to palpate any cervical or axillary glands.
I was a fit 55 year old general practitioner. I was aware that the
pattern was unusual, but any malignant glands that I have felt
in my career have been hard and fixed. Also, like most
competitive road cyclists, I shave my legs, so I hoped that the
adenopathy was due to razor rash.
After a month my wife made an appointment for me to see my
general practitioner, but I cancelled it as I was convinced that
the swellings were getting smaller. Another month later, I
realised that there had been no significant change, so I saw my
general practitioner. She examined me carefully, and, even
though I had felt something catch her fingers when she was
palpating my left upper quadrant, it was still a surprise when
she said “I think you’ve got a spleen.” It was just palpable,
halfway through deep inspiration.
Spending an hour googling “splenomegaly” and “regional
adenopathy” made me realise that I had a diagnosis of lymphoma
until proved otherwise. My general practitioner and consultant
colleagues kindly let me organise an urgent inguinal node
biopsy. Histology showed follicular lymphoma. I became
anorexic and lost weight, so I assumed that I had the B type
symptoms.
By the time I saw Dr Knechtli, the consultant haematologist,
my appetite was returning, making me realise that my “B type”
symptoms had actually been due to anxiety. However, the
presence of splenomegaly on top of adenopathy in two areas
suggested that I had widespread, stage IV lymphoma. The
recommended management was “watchful waiting,” with no
advantage in beginning chemotherapy until it started to cause
problems. I read that recent improvements in treatment mean
that life expectancy has lengthened considerably, but, as one of
the papers coyly put it, there is as yet “no levelling off of the
survival curve.”
My blood count was normal apart from showing lymphopenia,
and the haematologist seemed pleasantly surprised that the bone
marrow aspirate and trephine results showed no sign of
involvement by lymphoma. However, staging computed
tomography showed some mild mediastinal and abdominal
lymphadenopathy. It also showed extensive nodular shadowing
in my lungs, reported as being “likely to be related to
lymphoma.” I was inclined to accept that diagnosis and, in view
of my lack of any relevant symptoms, wait until it caused
problems. The haematologist, however, told me that lung
infiltration was not typical of lymphoma and persuaded me to
accept a respiratory referral.
The chest consultant explained that there were four possible
causes of the computed tomography findings: lymphoma,
infection, sarcoidosis, and “a surprise,” which I took to be a
euphemism for carcinoma. Bronchoscopy was normal, so I was
listed for a lung biopsy. As a medical student in the late 1970s,
I had spent time on a chest surgery ward and had vivid memories
of patients with uncontrolled postoperative pain. To my relief,
modern video-assisted thoracic surgery with excellent general
and local anaesthesia, as well as nurses who ensured that I had
sufficient analgesia, meant that my postoperative progress was
not nearly as unpleasant as I had feared.
I was on holiday in France when the chest physician phoned
with the histology: sarcoidosis. This was a huge relief. My
knowledge of sarcoidosis was minimal, as I had never
encountered a patient with it, so I spent a lot of time reading it
up. I found that many cases, like mine, are asymptomatic,
coincidental findings that may resolve spontaneously.
An interesting finding was that sarcoidosis can cause
splenomegaly and inguinal adenopathy, as well as lymphopenia.
I felt so well that it was difficult to believe that I had widespread
lymphoma, so the overlap between the clinical findings in the
two conditions made me start to question my lymphoma staging.
When I saw Dr Knechtli for a follow-up appointment, I asked
him whether all my clinical findings, apart from the single larger,
biopsied inguinal gland, could actually be due to sarcoidosis.
Unlike the haematologist, I had had two weeks to think and read
up about that as a possible alternative explanation for my clinical
signs. As a general practitioner, I know just how difficult it is
when patients come up with a completely different way of
interpreting their symptoms, and I could see in the
haematologist’s face his struggle to analyse the alternative
diagnosis and lymphoma staging that I had sprung on him.
He agreed that my lymphoma staging was now uncertain but
said that the only way to confirm it absolutely would be to have
an excision biopsy of my spleen, a mediastinoscopic lymph
node biopsy, and a computed tomography guided biopsy of my
abdominal glands. Given the risks and morbidity attached, these
were not attractive options.
After discussion, I requested a biopsy of my mildly enlarged
contralateral inguinal nodes. To my delight, they were reported
as being reactive rather than due to lymphoma or sarcoidosis.
That led me to hypothesise that all my clinical findings could
be due to sarcoidosis or be reactive, apart from a single gland
on the right side that had undergone lymphomatous change. If
true, it would mean that I had stage I follicular lymphoma with
an 80% chance of cure by radiotherapy.
Discussions with Dr Knechtli and a clinical oncologist confirmed
that radiotherapy was a reasonable option. They ensured that I
was aware that I may indeed have stage IV lymphoma, making
a course of radiotherapy futile. However, given the “sporting
chance” that I had only stage I disease, the risks and morbidity
associated with the relatively low dose of treatment seemed
acceptable, so I had a course of radical radiotherapy to my right
hemi-pelvis.
I have been in the unusual position of having moved from an
early diagnosis of stage IV (and probably incurable) follicular
lymphoma to the possibility that I may have a much earlier,
potentially curable stage. Because of my dual diagnoses, each
of which can mimic the other, there have been 19 rate limiting
steps from my initial working diagnosis to starting definitive
treatment. Whereas the mean waiting time for each of them was
two weeks, I needed to arrange private treatment three times to
avoid considerably longer waits, and the overall nine month
delay felt never ending. My observation of other European health
systems suggests that the process would have been much faster
in them, and I suspect that is one of the many reasons for their
better cancer survival rates.
Modern evidence based treatment and superb clinical skills
meant that I experienced far fewer side effects from
investigations and radiotherapy than I would have experienced
when I qualified in 1980. One surprise has been that, of all the
clinicians who have examined me, by far the most skilled and
thorough clinical examinations have been done by my general
practitioner and the haematologist. That may be because they
are less reliant on imaging to tell them what is going on. I would
urge all my colleagues to follow their example: although in
many cases clinical examination does not tell us anything
unexpected, sometimes it does. My own general practitioner’s
knowledge that she needed to look for my spleen, and her
competence in finding it, were key in accelerating my initial
investigations.
A year has passed since my radiotherapy. My blood markers
are back to normal; a recent scan showed a normal sized spleen
and no adenopathy. Although this is encouraging, follicular
lymphoma is a very slow growing malignancy. It will be some
years before I know with any degree of confidence whether my
“stage I” hypothesis is correct and whether the treatment was
successful.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P018
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Acromegaly

 Something strange started happening to me around 
10 years ago. My shoe size grew from 9 to 11, my 
income permanently dried up, and the girlfriend I 
was going to marry left after we stopped having sex. 
It wasn’t just the sex, or lack of it. I also dramatically changed, both personally and physically. My 
nose grew bigger, my forehead enlarged, and my 
face and hands became puffy and coarse. But these 
were all gradual changes that I only realised in retrospect. Some friends noticed more acutely. One, who 
hadn’t seen me for four years, looked shocked when 
I opened my front door. “You’ve rearranged your 
face,” he blurted. My younger sister was blunter. She 
said I looked like I’d been in a fight.
I went from being dynamic and creative to someone 
who was apathetic and exhausted. My moods became 
widely variable. I was more anxious and easily fatigued. 
Inexplicably, my voice grew deeper. On many nights 
I had weird, out of body experiences. I woke up sweating, scared, and gasping.
I had been a successful freelance journalist and film 
maker, but things began to go wrong. Increasingly I 
went to the office late or not at all. Frequently I did little 
or nothing at work. Then I’d go home and do nothing 
there. Often I fell asleep at inappropriate times—at my 
desk or in the middle of having a cup of tea. Sometimes 
I tried hard to snap out of it by starting a grand new 
project, but it didn’t work. I soon ran out of steam and 
mourned the loss of my former vibrant self.
From 1997 to the summer of 2001, I saw all manner 
of medical experts. My general practitioner collected 
almost 100 pages of notes about me. The doctors found 
nothing fundamentally wrong. I came to think it was 
me. I must have just “lost it.” My general practitioner 
sent me to the practice counsellor. I told him I was worried that I had stopped being creative. He replied that 
I’d got to an age when I couldn’t expect to be creative 
any more. I was only 42.
An opportunity to discover what was wrong came and passed. A small lump rapidly grew in my right 
breast—gynaecomastia. “Stop taking vitamin pills,” 
said one consultant. “Have surgery,” said another. 
Neither doctor, though, arranged hormone tests to 
determine the cause. A fortnight before surgery, the 
lump disappeared. Later it reappeared in my left 
breast. Ignore it, advised a general practitioner.
My dermatologist missed the diagnosis by not discovering the true cause of chronic mountainous acne 
on my back that was extremely painful. My orthopaedic doctor lost an opportunity by not finding the 
reason for joint pains. My dentist missed a chance 
by not recognising the widening gaps in my lower 
front teeth and problems with my lower jaw overbite. The doctors in my general practice failed by not 
understanding the combination of all my complaints, 
including depression, apathy, and snoring. When my 
testosterone was discovered to be substantially below 
normal, one general practitioner told me to come 
back in 12 months.
So I struggled for years, undiagnosed and with 
symptoms that stopped me from earning a living. 
Even when at last I was referred to an endocrinologist, he was also unable to make a timely diagnosis. 
It was only by becoming a more informed patient 
that I eventually added up the sum of all my symptoms and spelt out acromegaly. My suspicion sent 
me into a deep shock.
My endocrinologist failed to confirm a diagnosis 
of acromegaly in the six months I was his patient. 
Instead, he proposed a “non-functioning tumour.” 
Only belatedly was I sent for an oral glucose tolerance test, the standard marker for acromegaly. As 
the endocrinologist then went on holiday, I asked 
my general practitioner’s receptionist to obtain the 
results for me but was met with reluctance. I became 
exasperated and said, “This could be a life threatening illness.”
A general practitioner rang back: “Your growth hormone levels are completely normal, and you do not 
have any insufficiency. This is hardly a life threatening illness.” I remember feeling disappointed. Maybe 
my suspicion was completely wrong. “I thought my 
growth hormone level might have been too high,” I 
said. I was sweating and my heart was beating fast. 
“Well,” said the doctor, “as part of the test, you had 
taken a growth hormone accelerant, so I expect the levels would be a bit higher.” “No,” I replied, “the glucose I took should have suppressed growth hormone if 
my pituitary had been functioning normally.”
“Hold on a minute,” said the doctor. “I’ll check 
the test results again.” She returned to tell me my 
growth hormone levels. “That’s high above normal,” 
I exclaimed. “Surely it means I have a condition 
known as acromegaly?” “I’m afraid you’re now talking beyond my depth,” admitted the doctor. “I think 
it’s best you wait for your endocrinologist to come 
back from holiday.”
I didn’t want to wait. Instead, I wrote to an 
acromegaly expert, Professor John Monson, at St 
Bartholomew’s Hospital, London. I enclosed my test 
results and told him I had acromegaly. The next 
day he phoned to ask, “Who made the diagnosis 
of acromegaly?” I paused. “I did,” I said, somewhat hesitantly, waiting for his rebuke. “Well,” said 
the professor, “you’re absolutely right.” When we 
met a few days later, in August 2001, Professor 
Monson said he could tell immediately that I had 
acromegaly just by looking at me. The test results 
confirmed that my growth hormone levels were 
around 2500% above normal. There was no doubt 
I had acromegaly.
The diagnosis at last provided an explanation for 
all my strange and incapacitating symptoms, which 
was a huge relief. I also felt let down. Surely any 
one of my doctors should have been able to recognise what was wrong with me much earlier? Apparently, the typical delay in diagnosis for acromegaly 
is 10 years or more. Isn’t this a failure of medicine? 
The challenge for doctors, and patients, is to catch the illness early, years before the extensive damage 
and deformities occur.
Naturally, I wanted a cure. Yet I knew that with 
a large tumour my chances were low. The position of the tumour also caused concern as it was 
dangerously close to the carotid artery. This made 
me determined to find the most experienced neurosurgeon. That led me to Professor Rudolf Fahlbusch, 
the then director of neurosurgery at the University 
of Erlangen-Nuremberg in Germany. He had performed over 4000 pituitary operations, probably 
more than anyone else in the world. I was right to 
seek the best. I needed two operations, and afterwards Professor Fahlbusch wrote that the transsphenoidal surgery on me was “one of the most 
difficult and risky of my surgical life.”
After the operations my face started going back to 
normal and my testosterone levels increased. Later, 
prolactin and thyroid levels returned to normal. My 
sleep improved and the out of body experiences 
stopped. The cystic acne on my back disappeared. 
Most importantly, the growth hormone levels also 
went down considerably but, alas, not enough. Blood 
tests showed I still had acromegaly.
Eventually, I sought the help of a leading acromegaly expert, Professor John Wass at the Churchill 
Hospital in Oxford. He fought hard for me to be 
treated on the NHS with octreotide (Sandostatin Lar, 
Novartis) injections, costing almost £1000 a shot, 
which I now receive every six weeks. My growth 
hormone levels are now at last in the normal range.
I feel I’ve made considerable progress. Unfortunately, though, I am not yet back to my work. 
Although I have my good days, I still get easily 
and unpredictably fatigued, a typical symptom for 
acromegaly patients, even after treatment. After my 
second operation I also developed a deep and debilitating headache in the centre of my forehead that, 
five years later, still visits me most days. Joint pains 
have also recently required surgery to both knees. 
Clearly the years of untreated acromegaly did some 
damage, not all of which can be undone. Nevertheless, I’m an optimist and remain hopeful that I may 
eventually be able to resume my career and life’s 
plans in general.
My relationship is greatly improved with my 
general practitioner, Stephen Cohen. We’ve been 
on a long journey together and learnt considerably 
from it. From a difficult start, ours is now a true 
doctor-patient partnership. Dr Cohen has become 
my strongest ally through the medical maze and has 
helped to restore my confidence in the profession. 
Recently he told me, “I’ve come to the conclusion 
that any doctor who’s not prepared to learn may as 
well retire.” All the doctors at the practice have met 
to try and learn from my case. That, I applaud.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P019
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Rheumatoid arthritis

My father had ankylosing spondylitis with active peripheral arthritis and iritis and was severely ill all his life. He
died early from a stroke at age 62. Despite this family history, when I started to experience symptoms of a
painful, swollen knee, it didn’t occur to me that I might have inflammatory arthritis. My parents’ generation
kept their health problems private and didn’t really share their difficulties with their children. So although I was
aware my father had something called spondylitis and was taking various drugs, I didn’t really understand
what this meant, what caused it, or what the future might hold for him, or me.

Rheumatoid arthritis is painful and disabling. It is not well understood by the general public, who hear the
word arthritis and interpret it as osteoarthritis, a quite different disease. This is a source of great irritation to
people with rheumatoid arthritis. A major cause of delay in diagnosis is people’s failure to recognise that their
symptoms indicate potentially serious and incurable illness. This is probably why it took nine months before
my boss forced me to go and see a general practitioner, by which time I could barely walk. The general
practitioner referred me immediately to a rheumatologist and rheumatoid arthritis was diagnosed straight
away. I found myself in hospital having my knee aspirated and injected with steroid, and my whole leg was
put into plaster. As soon as the cast came off and I started walking around again, the knee filled up. I can’t
now remember how many times it was aspirated.

I had my daughter in 1982, having taken five years to get pregnant—I didn’t know then that rheumatoid
arthritis can affect fertility. I was well during my pregnancy, as is often the case, but the disease flared up
badly after Anna was born and went everywhere in my body, attacking particularly my knees, hands, wrists,
and elbows. I remember having difficulty in holding and lifting my daughter. By the time she was 9 months
old, I was in hospital having my first operation—a right knee synovectomy, which was extremely painful with a
long recovery period. I was fortunate to have a nanny to help me as I had gone back to work when Anna was
3 months old, and despite severe disease and 17 operations, I have always worked and wanted to work.
In 1984 I was made a director of the company I was working for and I was determined that rheumatoid
arthritis was not going to prevent me achieving my goals.

The treatment I received in those early years was very different from the treatment received by people with a
new diagnosis these days. All I was given for the first three years, despite severe disease and visible bone
erosions in x ray films, were pain killers and non-steroidal anti-inflammatories. The disease modifying drugs,
which were considered to be very toxic and were given only when a patient had become extremely ill and
disabled are now given immediately on diagnosis. I was hospitalised several times when things got really
bad; I had lost weight and was about 48 kg and was beginning to despair. The treatment that I was receiving
(or lack of it) was usually causing me to be in tears after my clinic visits. Fortunately a medical friend who
could see the trouble I was in did some research and recommended an eminent rheumatologist. I
immediately sought referral to him from my general practitioner.

By the time I was sitting in front of my new consultant, I was a week away from a second synovectomy, this
time on my left knee, which I was dreading. He took a thorough history, arranged blood tests and radiography
and announced that I didn’t need the operation. I was delighted. He prescribed me steroids, which I felt at the
time literally saved my life. However, I didn’t realise then that I would be on a low dose of steroids for some
20 years. With hindsight, I would have tried to wean myself off them at a much earlier stage had I known the
damage they would do. In fact, if someone had sat me down and told me what I would be facing over the
coming years, I would have been horrified and terrified; perhaps it is just as well that we can’t see into the
future but must deal with things as they occur.

Over the next decade I tried penicillamine, sulfasalazine, hydroxychloroquine, oral and parenteral
methotrexate and had gold injections for five years. Nothing worked. I continued to erode, and I had four
operations on my hands and wrists to repair ruptured tendons, excise the ulnar styloid on both wrists, and
fuse both wrists with Stanley pins. Each operation meant that an arm was out of action for three months,
which wreaked havoc with my life: I couldn’t drive, cook, wash or dry my hair myself, get dressed, type
normally, and so on. I also had hip replacement surgery, during which I lost so much blood that my
haemoglobin levels dropped so low that I had to have a blood transfusion. During a previous spell in hospital
for bed rest the doctors had established that I had pernicious anaemia, and so after many iron injections, I
was switched to monthly B-12 injections, which I must now have every three months for the rest of my life.

In 2000 my consultant managed to get me onto a trial of infliximab, a new anti-TNF (anti-tumour necrosis
factor) drug, at Guy’s Hospital in London. I was desperate. Nothing had worked for me and only the steroids
were enabling me to function at all. Within an hour and a half of receiving the first infusion, I could feel a
positive difference. I wasn’t so stiff and painful. I could see a glimmer of hope that maybe things could be
different, and after four months of taking the drug I was getting my life back. At the end of the trial I was
devastated to be taken off the drug and told I wouldn’t be able to get it because no one would fund it. I found
this incredible, and it took six months of fighting to get myself back on treatment.

It took me a long time to come to terms with the impact of rheumatoid arthritis on my life. I used to be very
active: I danced, rode horses, did snow and water skiing, played tennis, and loved walking, but bit by bit I
was having to give up all these things. When I couldn’t wear heels any longer I had to change my whole
wardrobe to accommodate shoes I didn’t like. I put off applying for a blue badge because I couldn’t face
being referred to as disabled. My arthritis has affected not just me, but my family. Every time I went into
hospital for more surgery, my young daughter used to think that I was going to die, and we always had to
spend time consoling and reassuring her that I really was going to come home again.
Since 2000 I have had posterior and anterior cervical spine fusion of C4 and C5, both elbows replaced, a left
total knee replacement, right hip replacement, triple arthrodesis to my left foot, both ankles replaced, and
reconstruction of my left foot and ankle. I have also had iritis, which has left me unable to see out of my right
eye. I am due to have a vitrectomy on this eye in the hope that once the debris caused by the inflammation
has been removed, a contact lens may enable me to see more clearly. I do hope so as the lack of vision in
that eye interferes with the good sight in my other eye, which I pray will remain. The thought of this happening
in my good eye is something that I cannot contemplate; it would be devastating.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P020
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Alcoholism

My wife was shattered and our marriage was nearly shattered, not by my drinking but by the deceit in which I
had wrapped it. I am 78. All my adult life I have drunk alcohol, heavily, increasingly. Some years after
retirement in 1995, to conceal my drinking I started on vodka. My day became triangulated around alcohol:
are the pubs open, does this shop sell half-bottles, dare I ask for another Scotch?
Too often, my wife came home to find me incapable. Once, not understanding, and fearing that I had had a
stroke, she took me to the emergency department, and once she called an ambulance. She felt humiliated by
the pity the staff showed her and their contempt for me. A crisis erupted around Christmas 2009 when she
noticed how frequently I was making large cash withdrawals. I had to tell the truth.
Addiction is selfishness. Having been afraid of the effect on me if my wife found out about my drinking, I had
never imagined the devastating effects on her. Suddenly, I seemed to her a fraud. She shrank from family and
friends. She developed shingles. She is diabetic: her blood sugar went haywire. Her unhappiness and
confusion were palpable. She stated that she could not bear another drunken spell but would leave, and she
told our children (each of us had been widowed previously).
At our wedding, her eldest son had expressed gladness that she had found me to look after her. I had not
done so. I had devastated her. Nevertheless, he and his siblings were far more supportive than I deserved.
My sons were distressed but loving. One of them asked simply, “Which is more important to you, to have
another drink or to keep your marriage?”

We have two old friends, a couple, who have been suffering grave health problems. My wife said, “She has
coped better than I have.” They could each count on the other, whereas my wife could not count on me—I
was the problem.
Our general practitioner, Dr Raby, had introduced me to the classic alcohol regime—“maximum four units a
day, two dry days a week.” I promised to follow this, but a unit became a glass, the glass a tumbler . . . five
seems little more than four, six than five . . . today without became tomorrow without . . . and back to where
we started. I went to see him again with my wife. She poured out the whole story and he promised to arrange
the help I needed.
The NHS was excellent, the staff thoughtful, and the approach well structured. Dr Raby introduced me to a
friendly and positive specialist nurse. Her advice was categorical. I must give up alcohol completely for at
least six months. Addicts give up often but, at least for my type, there comes a truly decisive moment. A
concatenation of old reasons for giving up comes together with a powerful new element. Suddenly, deep
inside, the option of not giving up closes.
Years earlier, when I gave up smoking, this new element was observing my father die of emphysema. Now, it
was my desperate wish to repair the damage to my wife and to save our marriage.
I saw my specialist nurse every couple of weeks. She encouraged me to foresee occasions when I would
want a drink and to work out how to handle them, perhaps by circumventing the situation or finding
distraction. Above all, she taught me to prepare mentally so that temptation never took hold.
My wife cut her finger on a broken mug and had to be rushed to the emergency department with
septicaemia. They operated on her twice and kept her in for a week. She was on antibiotics for a fortnight
after she came out. Her resilience had been badly affected by the shock of discovering my addiction, and for
months she remained prone to bouts of exhaustion. The only good thing was that the advice I had received
from my specialist nurse paid off. I was worried, and most evenings tired and alone, just right for a quick
drink. In fact, I barely thought about alcohol.
My track record gave my wife good reason to doubt me. However, she rejected breathalysers and warily took
me on trust. My expenditure, blood pressure, and weight fell sharply. I guess my comportment gradually
improved from when I had been drinking.
At social events I would state that I was taking a holiday from booze. Some probably muttered, “Aha, I
thought he was an alcoholic,” but most, no doubt, had their own concerns and barely noticed. Our children
felt that nobody should drink in my presence. They took some convincing that I did not want them penalised
by my misbehaviour.
My specialist nurse referred me to a psychiatrist. He carried out a cognitive intelligence test, although I did
not realise that’s what it was. Presumably he also evaluated whether I needed chemical help or had yet done
myself serious physical or mental damage. Undeservedly, I seemed not to have. He urged me to see a
psychologist. I did not want anybody fossicking about in my psyche (there is nothing to find), but I did want
to convince my wife that I was tackling things seriously, so I accepted.
The psychologist was easy to talk to and always constructive. She said to me, “Tell your wife that you are the
same chap but that the alcohol takes over.” The structure of my eight sessions with her was largely based on
research. She wondered why I drank—for example, was it to overcome insecurity or improve my chances
sexually? The answer was always “No.”
We discussed the meaning of the word “craving.” To me, craving is sharp, physical yearning, hard to resist. I
still feel a craving for tobacco, decades after giving up, if somebody lights up nearby. I have never felt it for
alcohol. To the psychologist, craving is merely a wish for something.
She remarked, “There is still a piece of the jigsaw missing.” I do not feel any craving for alcohol, so why did I
become alcoholic? I regard myself as intelligent and honest. Nevertheless, for decades I drank to an extent
that was downright stupid, and that led to downright dishonesty.
Although every drunkard has something in common with every other drunkard, not all drunkards are the
same. We are not all “fighting our demons.” I have no demons. Although uncomfortable and ashamed when
hung over, I am otherwise quite at ease with myself. I suffered no secret childhood harm. I loved and
respected my parents and cherish their memory. Admittedly, I went to boarding school, but in war time this
seemed normal.
I associate alcohol with freedom and manliness, perhaps thanks to the fictional heroes of my adolescence—
Bulldog Drummond’s pints, James Bond’s martinis—but mostly I drank because I enjoy the taste and effect.
However, alcohol rots your judgment—“one more won’t hurt.” The first “one more” may not. Later comes the
one that does—and you are gone.
Once you acknowledge and then understand the problem, you can control it. I left it late. Happily, my wife
had the generosity to trust me once more and the persistence to stay with me.
My six months’ abstinence would have ended in mid-July 2010. We were in France, out of range of Dr Raby’s
support system, and my wife feared moderation would be impossible. I extended the abstinence period until
our return home in September and then for a further few weeks because of another trip abroad.
In October 2010, after nine months’ abstinence, I started drinking occasionally. For me the rule “maximum
four units a day, two dry days a week” feels wrong—a maximum easily becomes a norm. Rather than be a
steady drinker who takes a regular break, I prefer to be a steady non-drinker who takes the odd glass. It
seems to be working.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P021
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Motor neurone disease

In 2004 my wife Diane noticed that her arms and shoulders
ached and that she tired easily. We put this down to repetitive
strain and consulted our general practitioner. The physiotherapist
at the practice referred her to a specialist, who after extensive
tests broke the news. In May 2006, Diane was given the
diagnosis of motor neurone disease.
We had never heard of the disease before. We were both
devastated, even more so when the specialist told us that Diane
might die within three months. We came out of the specialist’s
office in a state of disbelief and shock. From that terrible day I
became Diane’s full time carer; not quite what I had in mind
for my retirement.
The hardest part was telling our children, family, and friends.
We both felt hurt that friends stopped visiting or making contact.
Why? And we both agreed not to tell anyone that Diane might
have only three months to live.
Within days of the diagnosis the professional team started to
visit and introduced themselves to us. Our local general
practitioner took on looking after Diane and learning about
motor neurone disease for the duration. The entire team became
more than specialists in their own fields; they became great
friends, making regular visits that we could rely upon. When
members of the team linked up and made joint visits, these were
of great benefit to Diane, as she could save her breath and energy
by not having to repeat herself to each individual. She looked
forward to these meetings eagerly and although she found them
exhausting, her spirit and wellbeing was greatly improved by
each one.
Diane and I had a mantra we would say together, “If this is the
best I am going to feel, then I’m going to make the best of it.”

In becoming her carer, I had to be careful not to treat her as
someone different or as an invalid. Instead, I needed to let her
do whatever she could, so she could keep her independence for
as long as possible.
Diane got very frustrated when she realised she could no longer
do even simple things for herself. Appearance was always part
of her life, and she always looked beautiful, so we talked to both
her hairdresser and beautician, who both agreed that if she was
not up to visiting either of them, that they would visit our home
and do whatever was needed. People often remarked on how
soft and smooth Diane’s skin looked. We both put it down to
the fact that every day after her shower, I would give her a full
body massage using emu oil. She enjoyed the massage sessions
because they provided contact between us. A little retail therapy
also gave her a boost. Her appearance was maintained right up
to the end. It was also important that I made an effort to always
look my best for her. I could not allow myself to become ill.
Washing and bathing was the next experience we had to
overcome. My lifting Diane in and out of the bath was becoming
a worry for her, and I was worried that I could drop her. We
agreed to take the bath out and install a shower, and we had
many fun showers together.
Saliva built up in Diane’s throat making it difficult for her to
breathe and eat properly, and causing her to choke often, which
exhausted and frightened her. The only thing I could do to help
was to rush her to the bathroom while supporting her, turn on
the cold tap and get her to gargle. Then I would place my fingers
in her mouth and pull the thick saliva away, which was very
unpleasant for her but necessary. This procedure used a lot of
her energy and scared her, but it worked. One solution was for
her to drink plenty of sparkling water and take carbocisteine
(Mucodyne syrup), 10 mL morning and night, prescribed to
reduce the thickness of the saliva.
Medicines in tablet form became a problem as she was having
difficulty swallowing; liquid medicines provided the answer.
We devised a cocktail, mixing all the different medicines together so that she only had to take one dose instead of the four
prescribed.
Breathing was becoming more and more difficult, and a bilateral
positive airway pressure machine was provided by the William
Harvey Hospital, Kent. Diane’s breathing improved beyond
recognition, as did her sleeping. She regained her appetite, food
tasted better, her speech improved, and her choking had reduced;
this was an important factor in prolonging her life.
Eating became more of a problem as her arms became weaker.
The solution was to share our meals together. I would feed her
a spoonful, and then I would eat a spoonful. This encouraged
her to eat and increased our sense of togetherness. We kept it
up until the very end of her life.
Always thinking about what was going to happen next, we
discussed, among other things, the possibility of Diane losing
her voice. She was given a light writer, a text to speech device,
to programme well known phrases and sayings, but she never
used it in earnest—she was determined to use her voice for as
long as she could.
Sleeping was another big obstacle. She could not sleep on her
back because that put too much pressure on her lungs. So we
experimented using various pillows, finally solving the problem
by using a shaped foot wedge under a v-shaped pillow, which
supported her at a 45 degree angle.
Shortly after Diane was diagnosed with motor neurone disease
in 2006, we went to Cairns in Australia. She was not really
strong enough but was very determined and insisted on going.
It was a big learning curve for both of us, in terms of
understanding the illness and each other, particularly as we
alone knew that Diane might die in three months. I looked after
her every need, which we both recognised later as a mistake on
my part because I had taken away her independence by not
allowing her to do even the simplest things for herself.
Early in 2007 Diane’s condition was deteriorating. She was
very aware that she was losing weight and what little strength
she had. She needed to wear her neck collar more often as her
neck muscles were weakening. Walking took its toll. I located
a lightweight wheelchair, “Oh this is comfortable Brian, what
do you think?,” she said. “You sure love?” I asked. “Yes, let’s
buy it.” The chair was a wonderful purchase because it opened
up a whole new world for both of us. Folded up it fitted into the
boot of our car, and we made many happy excursions together.
In 2008 Diane was showing signs of weakening, was very
frightened, and was losing weight very fast. We carried on with
life as best as we could and purchased an electric scooter to
provide a bit more independence for her. At the end of July, the
Pilgrims Hospice in Canterbury (http://www.pilgrimshospices.
org) opened a therapeutic labyrinth garden and we were the first
couple to walk it, which we were both very proud of. We were
both wearing our “MND” t-shirts and were hoping to raise
awareness of this terrible disease.
In September 2008 Diane gave up and wanted me to help her
end her life. Using all my strength, I refused her request and
quickly got her into a hospice, where she stayed for two and a
half weeks and they allowed me to help look after her.
At Christmas, she arranged a surprise birthday party for me at
our favourite restaurant. I asked her “Why this year and not
next, when I will be 70?” She replied, “I don’t think I will be
here next year.”
One of the worst things about motor neurone disease is watching
your loved one slowly fading away day by day, while becoming
more and more dependent on their carer. By mid 2009 Diane
was putting on a brave face, still smiling, but despite her efforts
she looked very weary; drawn, her face sunken, tired most of
the time, and sleeping more.
On 5 July, Diane decided to have a percutaneous endoscopic
gastronomy feeding tube fitted. The temporary tube was fitted
in adequately. We returned after a few days for the permanent
tube to be fitted. It was unsuccessful, caused her great pain, and
was removed. In August, Diane seemed to be picking up,
looking good, eating well, and smiling a lot. On 14 August, the
doctor visited our home and informed me, “I don’t think she
will make it to the end of August, she is near the end.” When
Diane and I had a discussion about the end of her life, she said,
“Change the radiator in the bathroom please. That is all I want,
I have always hated it.” Diane lost control of all her body
functions, was not sleeping well, and not eating. She was very
unwell, tired, upset, and irritable, lost her temper easily, was
very frightened, and was losing her voice.
On 1 September she did not want any food and slept all day. I
sat just waiting for some response from her. On 2 September
she was confused and frightened, unaware of where she was or
what she was doing. She did not recognise me. I called the
hospice, where we arrived around midday. The staff made her
as comfortable as they could. The doctor took me aside and
gave me the bad news that Diane had only a short while to live.
She died early the next day.
Only now can I admit that every day of Diane’s illness scared
the life out of me.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P022
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Recovering from severe brain injury

I was involved in a serious road traffic accident in May 2008. I was amnesic after the accident and have no
memory of it. I am told that a stag jumped into my open top Lotus 7 sports car in Epping Forest. I lost control
of the car, hit a tree at speed, and sustained a severe brain injury. It took the fire brigade an hour and a half to
cut me out of the car, and paramedics recorded my Glasgow Coma Scale score as 9.
At the local accident and emergency department I was found to have numerous soft tissue injuries and a
fractured right mandible, maxilla, and clavicle. A magnetic resonance imaging scan of my brain showed
bilateral frontal and temporal lobe contusions. I had a grand mal seizure. I was transferred to a neurosurgical
unit and spent several days in intensive care. My family were told on my admission that I might die, and
subsequently that I would never again be able to care for myself. I was transferred to the rehabilitation ward
in the hospital where I had worked as a consultant physician. As a patient I had excellent treatment, and the
kindness and concern of the staff were most striking.
I remained amnesic for 10 weeks. I was unaware of my clinical condition. My only memories from this period
were of a fabricated world I had created, populated by family members and in-laws. It was semi-dark, and I
could not contact anyone directly—with the exception of the luminescent Crossie, an imaginary young
daughter who was living several miles away from home. I wanted her to come back to live with me. Some
have suggested that she may have represented the cross of Christianity or a “cross” I had to bear. During the
amnesic period I spoke, sometimes appropriately, but I have no memory of this. However my wife says she saw glimpses of my previous self.

The fabricated world was all I had, and it seemed very real. As my memory started to return I realised that all
the family members it featured were dead and that Crossie had never existed. I went through a second
bereavement process for my absent loved family.
My daughter feels that my moving from a ward to a side room enhanced my progress. I began to recognise
staff and visitors but could not remember names. I then realised I had forgotten facts like family birthday
dates. I had forgotten who I was. I had lost all my mental geographical maps, so I could not be trusted to
leave the ward.
I had been nursed one to one, but became embarrassed when I realised I was being accompanied in the
toilet. This insight meant the one to one nursing could stop. I was now able to have physiotherapy, and
discovered that I had physical disabilities. My balance was poor, I was clumsy, and I had a slight visual field
defect.
My insight into my condition improved, and I began to realise what I had lost. I was told that my age, 60,
would make recovery harder. I later realised that some memories were false.
My speech and language therapist was Australian. We talked about animal names being used for
international rugby teams. I remembered the Australian Kangaroos rugby league team. As I thought of
kangaroos I remembered my childhood in Wales with cows in the fields and, I thought, kangaroos in the
forest nearby. I found myself theorising on how kangaroos had moved from Wales to Australia. When I
realised my mistake I felt embarrassed, but those I told found it amusing.
I was originally upset when the therapist told me I was tangential in my conversational responses. It seemed
she was trying to score points rather than help me. A little later, when I was talking to a colleague, I realised
that I was indeed being tangential. I respected my therapist more after this. These insights initially had a very
dispiriting effect on me, but they were to help me initiate a personal strategy for my recovery.
I called my personal strategy “being back at school” because I could not remember most of what I had learnt
or been taught in life. I remembered school as being an ordered environment with expert teachers. It was
similar in some ways to the structured rehabilitation programme I was now undergoing, starting the day with
exercise followed by a therapy timetable. This strategy gave me great consolation as it was a pathway. By
working hard I could regain much of what I had lost. I was starting in primary school again but could
sequentially improve and progress through each year until I reached my pre-accident level. In therapy
sessions I asked for homework to do in my room and then started setting my own homework.
I obtained my curriculum vitae, which showed how long I had been a consultant, how many papers I had
published, and that I had been a Royal College of Physicians examiner and clinical director in medicine. It
would be a very long journey to get any of this back. I then saw a psychologist who assessed my cognitive
function. I realised I had to redevelop my thinking processes. I did this by reading, accessing the internet,
doing Headway exercises (see box 2), playing Sudoku, and taking MENSA IQ tests.

After six months I thought that lost memories would be unlikely to return, but this was not so. First I had to
relearn memory techniques, beginning with attention, repeating the process, and practising retrieval. I then
found that I could remember my dreams again, and, where laborious attempts to remember things had failed,
memory started to return spontaneously. This convinced me that memory was still stored; it was now a
question of learning how to relocate it. It was as though I had an encyclopedia, but the index was missing.
I also found that experiential learning and memory were more efficient than abstract thought. Six months
after the accident I visited London Zoo, remembering and learning a lot. A visit to the outside of a previous
family home near Swansea triggered the memory of the contents of every room and the internal structure of
the house, which I had previously tried to remember and could not. The sensory stimuli from sight, sound,
and smell can be very strong. Being near the sea had a remarkable effect, with the sound and smell bringing
back old memories.
I came to terms with age delaying my progress. I saw David Attenborough, who is 20 years older than me,
talking about animals on the television. This made me realise that increasing age does not always destroy
ability: other factors are important for success, such as innate skill and determination. This observation had
the effect of increasing my perseverance, and I was able to see that early failure was not necessarily total
failure.
My physical injuries resolved. I was able to jog again, and I wanted to resume playing golf. Jogging was easy:
it was about getting fitter to run further. When I attempted to hit a golf ball on the practice ground my balance
was poor, and every shot went far to the left. However, I was able to analyse what was wrong. I found it was
my grip, and when this was adjusted I produced straighter shots.
I am working hard to improve my medical knowledge so that I might do some outpatient work. I am also
improving my teaching skills and doing some local archive work. One of the great inspirations for me is
Hippocrates. He said that no brain injury is too severe to despair of, nor too trivial to ignore.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P023
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Adult atopic eczema
In the 13 years since his eczema returned, John has tried the full panoply of treatments and been admitted to
hospital many times; he recognises that his is an exceptional case
Just after I graduated from university, my eczema returned. I had been hospitalised with the skin condition as
a child, and it had disappeared suddenly before my teens. When it came back, I immediately recognised the
telltale sign of an unbearable itch, which initially limited itself to the crooks of my elbows and the backs of my
knees.
My general practitioner’s treatment regimen of emollients and an ever increasing strength of topical steroids
failed as the eczema spread all over my body. My overwhelming early feelings were of anger, helplessness,
and dread. I felt the eczema wasn’t being treated aggressively enough but knew there was no magic cure and
that I might have to live with it for the rest of my life.
I was diagnosed with severe atopic eczema, and my health quickly worsened through a combination of
habitual scratching and a barrage of infections that exacerbated the condition. I thought nothing of ripping at
my skin continually until the blood was flowing and I was exhausted and in too much pain to continue. My
skin was forever dry, inflamed, and covered in open wounds.
I endured a broad range of symptoms in that first year of my relapse, learning all the spiteful ways that atopic
eczema can manifest itself. Weeping eczema ruined bedding, stuck to clothes, and was a cloying, unpleasant
reminder. Yellow crusting meant infected eczema, which required antibiotics. Inflamed hair follicles caused
white, painful spots all over my legs. Meanwhile, I derived a perverse pleasure from picking and scratching at
wounds that hadn’t healed.
I finally saw a dermatologist who fast tracked my admission to Chelsea and Westminster Hospital. It was
both a relief to be well cared for and a worry that things had got so out of hand. I remember feeling ashamed
that I hadn’t been able to cope at home. Looking back, I should have been referred to secondary care much
sooner—not because I somehow deserved better care but because I obviously needed specialist treatment a
GP couldn’t deliver. The common misconception is that adults with eczema are able to magically cope better
just because they are adults.
Alongside all the physical symptoms were the psychological pressures. I felt frustrated, powerless, and
embarrassed about the way I looked, and enormously guilty. Eczema is, to my mind at least, like a form of
self harm, and to that end I felt responsible for what was happening to me, and still do. Obviously I can
rationalise that having eczema is not my fault, but ultimately the root of the problem is the damage done
when I tear at my skin on a daily basis.
It was like having a split personality. When the eczema was subdued I could be outgoing, confident, and
sociable; the other side of me felt awkward, was ashamed to be seen in public, and would default to his
insular world. Staying in meant not being judged, a safety net of sorts; something that continues even today.
I started the immunomodulator, ciclosporin, after that initial spell in hospital, which stabilised my health and
gave me a glimpse of how I could manage my eczema, without it controlling me. Over the next 18 months,
my dose of ciclosporin was first increased to the maximum safe level for my body weight to keep the eczema
at bay—but when blood tests flagged up potential problems, it had to be gradually lowered, then stopped
after it became ineffective.
Since the age of 21, I have been taking ciclosporin, azathioprine, or a combination of oral tacrolimus and
mycophenolate at one time or another. All share one characteristic: my body adapts to them and the eczema
becomes uncontrollable. In those 12 years, I have been admitted to hospital many times and the number of
consultants I’ve seen stretches into double figures. I’m an extreme case—a fact I often need to remind myself
of after a torrid scratch and the usual soul searching.
Along with my systemic medication, the side effects of which included severe nausea, shakes, extreme
tiredness, and being prone to dizzy spells, I have been prescribed short courses of oral prednisolone. This
has always been successful as a short term fix—but the impact of rebound eczema often makes me regret
taking it. A week of respite will always precede a horrendous flare, but to see my skin clear, even for a short
time, can be a real boost.
Coping with eczema, as I’ve learnt over the years, extends far beyond taking steroids, immunosuppressants,
antibiotics, and antihistamines. Eczema interferes with every aspect of life. Tackling people’s perceptions and
lack of knowledge in the wider world about eczema was a serious shock. I was once warned not to take any
more time off work or I would be fired, a week after coming out of hospital. There is no quick fix for eczema,
and for some people, whose only reference point may be mild eczema, the severity of my condition is hard to
understand.
The unpredictable nature of the condition has made forging a successful career really difficult at times. Taking
time off work can be awkward enough, but having no control over the situation and finding a suitably
understanding employer has been hit and miss. Additional stresses include an impossible desire to keep my
condition secret from a new employer so as not to stand out as troublesome; explaining eczema to new
colleagues all over again; applying creams effectively at work; and balancing the drowsy effects of
hydroxyzine with being able to do a full day’s work.
Needless to say, through all of this a support network is invaluable, and trusting someone with all your worst
problems concerning eczema is a vital crutch on which to lean. I often have the same conversation with my
father about my skin: he says that he knows how attritional and difficult it can be for me and he wishes he
could do something—this in itself is therapeutic.
I am lucky enough to have a wife who accepts me, incessant scratching and all. She is not judgmental, nor
does she get angry at me for repeatedly doing such terrible damage to my skin. To be built back up again
when at the absolute lowest point is something I’ve had to rely on a number of times, and it’s both a stark
warning about how debilitating eczema can get and humbling to have someone there to help and
understand. What shouldn’t be underplayed is the impact on those who live with someone with eczema.
Everything from the lack of sleep to the emotional stress of seeing someone continually hurt themselves has
not been lost on me.
I was in hospital in 2010 with the worst eczema of my life. I’ve switched to taking methotrexate, which has
had some early success with my skin, but the future is a worry. Without that core stability of a successful
treatment, I flare constantly and am easily infected. I think I have a reasonable outlook: I have squared that I
might live with this forever but want a semblance of control to enable me to lead a normal life.
I am 34 and already scarred from years of scratching. I’ve taken more oral steroids, antibiotics, and
immunomodulators in the past year than ever before and am realistic enough to know there might be
consequences when I’m older—but what are my options? I’ve always taken the approach that if my eczema
gets out of hand then we’ll try something else. By now, though, I’m not sure there really is anything else,
which remains something of a worry. But new treatments do come along, and I’ll be the first in line when they
do.Being given the time to talk through issues properly with nurses, GPs, and dermatologists. Dealing
with eczema is complicated and being spared the time to answer questions really does matter—
that dermatology appointment may have been months coming and something to look forward to.
Failing that, access by email is a helpful stopgap between appointments
Identifying the start of a flare and acting quickly—an ice pack and distraction (usually television or
a computer game) can sometimes stop a flare before I’ve had time to do any serious damage
Reminding myself that it’s not my fault. Owing to the nature of eczema, a lot of guilt is wrapped up
with it
Identifying lifestyle changes and triggers that can make a difference. I no longer drink alcohol
because it quickly makes me hot, red, and itchy. My skin reacts dreadfully in the sun so I am
careful to keep covered up and choose a sensitive cream with the highest protection factor. Rain
often irritates my skin, and the herpes simplex virus via a cold sore is dangerous for my eczema
and needs treating quickly
Eczema support groups were not something I readily considered; I felt like I wanted to tackle
eczema myself and would never open up to strangers. However, I learnt tips that hadn’t occurred
to me before, and I was able to pass on knowledge that I’ve acquired over the years
The National Eczema Society is a charity offering a huge amount of information about every type
of eczema. The ability to tap into accurate medical and lifestyle information has been really useful Dermatologists who pushed me towards their favourite treatment—I was once pressured into
ultraviolet light treatment despite protesting that I was very sensitive to the sun. The result set me
back several months, and I needed time off work
When my skin deteriorates beyond a certain point, I might need help all of a sudden. Often getting
appointments or access to the right help urgently, given the demands on dermatology
departments, is not quick enoug.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P023
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Mood disorder in the perinatal period

With a history of depression since my teens, I was finally
diagnosed with bipolar disorder in my early 30s, when I was
hospitalised with a manic episode in 2008. I was psychotic and
dangerously out of control. Shortly after discharge I went into
a depression that effectively paralysed me for the next 18
months. I was a shadow of myself, existing (in relentless pain)
rather than living. I think you can only use metaphors to try and
describe what severe depression feels like—words simply do
not convey how bad it is. It was during this episode of
depression that I became pregnant. I was shocked and scared
when I found out—how on earth would I be able to take care
of a baby when I could barely even get out of bed? I remember
telling my community psychiatric nurse that I planned to commit
suicide straight after the baby was born but that I would try to
hold on until then.
At the time, I was taking lithium, which carries a raised risk of
fetal heart malformations. By the time I discovered I was
pregnant I was told it was too late to come off it, and given that
I was seriously suicidal, my psychiatrist recommended I
continue taking it. Waiting for the heart scan at 20 weeks was
an extremely anxious time. I was referred to the new perinatal
mental health service at the Whittington Hospital, London. I
was thoroughly assessed by a perinatal psychiatrist at 16 weeks.
She told me that I had a 1 in 2 chance of a relapse after the birth.
It was around this time that my depression finally began to lift,
so learning that the odds of my becoming ill again were so high
was very upsetting.
The perinatal team organised a multidisciplinary prebirth
planning meeting when I was 32 weeks along, which I, my
husband, and all the relevant health professionals involved in
my care attended. This included my community mental health
team, my general practitioner, and my named midwife. It was
reassuring to see all these people in the same room. One of my
main concerns was whether to discontinue the lithium so that I
could breastfeed. It was very useful to hear the viewpoints of
several different professionals, including a consultant
paediatrician.
The outcome of the meeting was a birth plan, which contained
a sort of contingency plan for the eventuality that I fall ill, along
with a list of warning signs that I had identified with the help
of my husband. The birth plan proved vital to my recovery after
the birth, and I found that my early recognition of the warning
signs was half the battle.I had planned on having a completely natural birth. Instead, I
was induced for almost 30 hours and ended up having an
emergency caesarean section. My baby then aspirated meconium
and had to be resuscitated. This was very traumatic. The first
feeling I had after my baby was born was that I wanted to die
because I was convinced that my baby would die. I became
hysterical and then went into a state of shock and vomited. My
baby was taken to the neonatal intensive care unit before I’d
had a chance to meet her, and after that I felt a guilty reluctance
to go and see her. This indifference carried on for the next few
days as I became completely preoccupied with myself.
I couldn’t sleep despite feeling exhausted, having not really
slept for two nights, and I had to be given sleeping pills. My
mind was racing, and even relaxing music would stimulate me.
Fortunately I had my own room, which meant I was shielded
to some extent from the noisy, stressful ward. I remember
thinking that everything seemed sharper and brighter and that
the ward notice board suddenly seemed blindingly red. I became
obsessed with the idea of going on daytime television to tell my
birth story. I was escalating into mania, and yet some of the
midwives on the ward did not seem to appreciate how scary this
was for me. I remember one of them saying to me when I told
her I thought I was becoming ill, “You don’t seem unwell.” I
replied with something like, “By the time it’s obvious to you
it’s too late for me.” I was very agitated and recall texting my
sister to say that you have to be acting like a crazy person or
killing yourself for people to take you seriously.
My postnatal care involved many different healthcare
professionals. This was exhausting and stressful, and having to
be seen by new people every day was at times detrimental to
my mental health. The two constants were my named midwife,
whom I’d seen regularly throughout my pregnancy, and the
perinatal team, who came to see me almost every day after the
birth during my two week hospital stay. The perinatal team
closely monitored my lithium levels and made sure that the
midwives on the ward chased up and administered the
appropriate medication.
The weekend after the birth, when I was at my most vulnerable,
unfortunately coincided with the perinatal team being off duty.
Weekend cover was provided by the psychiatric liaison team,
who were unfamiliar with my history. I remember recounting
my birth story to the two liaison team nurses, telling them it
was the most traumatic thing that had ever happened to me.
Then, before I had finished, one of the nurses’ beepers went off
and she left the room without saying anything to me. Shortly
afterwards, the other nurse walked out too, again with no
explanation. I waited for probably over half an hour, becoming
more and more anxious, to the point where I had palpitations
and was actually shaking. I eventually stormed out of the room
declaring I was going to see my baby and it was only then that
they paid attention. The visit from the liaison team did nothing
more than aggravate my already heightened mental state. What
followed was a series of mental health workers, recruited by
the liaison team, who were meant to provide me with one to
one support. However, as they didn’t seem to be properly trained
it was counterproductive. I remember becoming very distressed
when one of them came into my room when I was having private
time with my family and talked at great length about himself
and his career.
Ultimately, what helped me was having continuity of care and
a team of specialists who had knowledge of my history and who
were able to assess my mental health in the context of my birth.
Without the high level of care and intervention that I received
during my pregnancy and after the birth, I am certain that my
chances of a relapse would have been much higher.My baby is now a happy, healthy 1 year old. The first few
months were stressful, particularly as my moods were so
volatile, but with the help of a very supportive husband and
family and continuing treatment from my community mental
health team (which included valuable psychological therapy) I
managed to narrowly escape an episode of mental illness, and
I have remained well ever since. I count myself very lucky. Not
all women have the supportive family that I have, and most
women who become ill during pregnancy or after the birth do
not have ongoing mental health support. This problem needs to
be resolved.
My husband and I are now thinking about the possibility of a
second child. Although I am still taking lithium, my situation
is very different from that of two years ago. I am well and now
have the opportunity to plan for the next pregnancy. When the
time comes, I hope that I can access the perinatal mental health
service once again.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P024
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Mesothelioma

I was nearly fifty seven and a half when I left the kingdom of the well. In a final flurry of Cartesian dualism, of
course, my mind didn’t listen to my body, ignoring geriatric jogging times, inexpressible fatigue, and
increasing dyspnoea. A patient of mine with similar symptoms (who had an innocent viral infection) prompted
me to seek advice from my general practitioner. Thus it was that on a still, sun silked autumn afternoon, I was
infused with the recklessly fearful knowing from my chest radiograph that I had a pleural effusion on my right
lung. Probably infectious, said my general practitioner, though I could sense his unarticulated concern. There
are many causes, said the earnest respiratory consultant, whom I saw the next day, referring to some “rare
aetiologies.” It really was only those rare causes that interested me: can we please exclude them, and then I
can get back to normal? The pleural tap showed nothing (good), and a pleural biopsy was planned for the
next week.
The biopsy was carried out competently by a surgical team who all looked disturbingly downcast after the
procedure. None could address my increasing anxiety, except perhaps the most junior member of the team,
who I sense in retrospect did not feel he had either the authority or life experience to discuss the diagnosis. I
was told that while chronic infection could not be excluded entirely, tuberculosis was extremely unlikely, and,
yes, mesothelioma could not be excluded. Prepare myself for the possibility of something serious, I was
advised.The specialist nurse came to show my wife and me how to drain the pleural catheter, which was left in to
promote a pleurodesis. If there was anything I wanted to know about mesothelioma, he said, with the best of
intentions, he had lots of information available. The physical shock of his throwaway remark fractionally
preceded its violent emotional impact, but smiling blandly, I went down for a check radiograph, having been
invited to do so by the nurse on duty thus: “Could you get this young man to go down for a chest film when
you’re finished?” My guess is that the nurse was about 22 years old. While I was having the check film, my
wife asked the specialist (cancer) nurse why everyone was so downcast. At that point, everyone around knew
I had a mesothelioma, except me. I learnt about it by reading the discharge summary over a glass of
sauvignon blanc with lunch at home: malignant mesothelioma. “Patient is aware of the diagnosis,” said the
discharge summary.
The next 48 hours are spent talking to our four beautiful kids, aged mid-teens to early 20s, whose joyous
careers are currently sprinkled through school, part time jobs, and university. I can’t really convey in words
the catastrophic hurt my news has inflicted on them, and it is an insult, which at their age they should never
have to endure. I will die of this tumour, I say, and we must address that, neither accepting nor
comprehending it. This tumour will kill my body, I say, but I will yield my spirit and personhood reluctantly. We
embrace. They weep. I weep for them, for fear for myself, and for the unthinkable horror that they will
continue to inhabit the world in which I will play no part. Like my wife, they are brave, selfless, and
compassionate.
Thus I am dispatched to the kingdom of the sick permanently and irretrievably. This can never be a pleasant
journey, but it can be made at least tolerable, dignified, even. One’s guides in this world have a dual role: to
read the map and direct you accordingly, but also to be with you on the terrain, a place of great uncertainty.
Where one meets the most senior clinical staff, one is left with a sense of technical competence, undermined,
with some notable exceptions, by a hesitation to be brave. Eye contact is avoided when one strays off the
clinical map on to the metaphysical territory—I am a man devoid of hope—and circumlocution displaces a
compassionate exploration of my worst fears. Perhaps, as a doctor, I present an unusually severe challenge
to fellow clinicians—I am too much like them—and the horror of what lies before me deflects clinical carers
from straying on to that territory. No one can imagine the unimaginable except those, like me, who are
experiencing it.
But one’s journey to this bleak place can be rendered more bearable if everyone who shares a professional
role at the various staging posts bears the bleakness of the terminus in mind. Some simple ground rules
could improve the nature of the professional patient interaction, if not actually displace its underlying,
transactional mindset.
Please can all healthcare professionals stop asking patients to “Do this for me?” I’m not doing it for them, I’m
doing it for me. The key point here is about locus of control. If I am asked, or more often instructed, to do
something “for me”—meaning the health professional— then the locus of control for the transaction lies with
that person. But the focus of the transaction should be me, the patient. Structured in that way, the “for me”
defines the interaction as transactional—I am cared for—but not relational: one is left with the feeling that the
professional does not care about me but does something to me.
Please can we avoid crass attempts at humour? There is nothing funny about clutching a plastic bag with all
your clothes in, except your pants, socks, and shoes—just stop and think what that must be like—while trying to secure a hospital gown around you, and following, like some faithful gun dog, a radiology attendant
who without introduction commands you, with a broad grin to acknowledge his witty lack of grammar, to
“follow I!”
The most insensitive observation I am compelled to make is that the more junior ranks of ancillary health
professionals are simply unable to conceal the pleasure of the deployment of their authority.
Among clinicians, what individuals and teams think is being conveyed to their patient can be quite different
from what is being received, in hints, intonations, phrases, and speculations. The larger the clinical team, the
greater the possibility that clinical messages may not be conveyed consistently and uniformly.
In the care I have received, the transactions have been timely and technically impeccable. But the relational
aspects of care lacked strong leadership and at key moments were characterised by a hesitation to be brave.
What I have always feared in illness was anonymity, being packaged, losing control, not being able to say
“this is who I am.” In the end, one is left alone, here, in the kingdom of the sick.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P025
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Living with lymphangioleiomyomatosis

I need to walk my dog. She is delighted to be heading out. She is a runner. I, on the other hand, have a cystic
lung disease that has damaged my lungs. Running is out of the question. At best, I can walk at a measured,
matronly pace. I can only dream about running.
It has been four years since my diagnosis with lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM), a rare lung disease that
affects mostly women, during which I have experienced a dramatic decline in my lung function, followed by a
transplant assessment. The transplant team said I was too well to go on the list but have kept an eye on me
since. I then asked—begged—to be put on an experimental drug, sirolimus, which stabilised my condition. I
went from being a healthy, fit, 35 year old woman with a wonderful husband and a great job as a philosophy
lecturer, to being ill and scared. My diagnosis felt like everything was being taken away from me—suddenly,
unfairly, and with no prospect of compensation.
For quite a while I had been feeling breathless. I could feel my lung capacity falling. Eventually, I went to my
GP. She shrieked in horror when she saw my spirometry results. “I’ve never seen anything like this. I have no
idea what this could be.” I was alarmed and asked my father, a director of a medical screening centre, to
arrange a computed tomography (CT) scan for me. I had the scan in the morning, and returned to collect the
results in the afternoon.
The radiologist clearly did not want to break the bad news to me in person. He said, “Sit down. I’ll let you read about what you’ve got,” and handed me a heavy diagnostic manual. It was open at a page headed
“lymphangioleiomyomatosis.” I read the description of this strange disease, my illness, and got to the bottom
of the page: “Prognosis: ten years from onset of respiratory symptoms.” I could not speak or move. My only
thought was: 45—I will be dead by the time I am 45.
The first month was terrible. I tried to reach out to my friends, but many of them mumbled that they didn’t
know what to say and disappeared. A new awkwardness entered my life. The awkwardness of nurses doing
my breathing tests showing a sharp decline; the awkwardness of my parents, paralysed by their inability to
help; the awkwardness of the healthy, to whom illness is a foreign and exotic land.
In the months that followed I learnt that illness is multifaceted and complex; that it is a process, not a static
entity; and that it is possible to go on living well and experiencing wellbeing even within the context of a
terrible and incurable illness. This surprised me, as I had always thought of health as the sine qua non of
happiness. And yet, all of a sudden, I found myself changing, responding to constraints, learning to make
sense of my life in the light of my illness. The work of realigning my life, its values, and the meaning I gave its
different elements surprised me. At first, I still tried to move around briskly, run for the bus, cycle up a hill. After nearly fainting a few times, I
realised that I had to slow down. But there was a more subtle change instigated by my body. Whenever I
tried to do something that was no longer possible, like chew gum while walking, or lift and swing my nephew,
my body quietly registered the failure and removed the action from its repertoire. This change happened
slowly, subtly, but cumulatively. The result was quite amazing: I stopped sensing, and therefore no longer
think much about, what I cannot do.
I started seeing that the lived experience of illness was very different from its textbook descriptions or third
person view of it. I realised that the first person experience of illness was varied, changed continuously, and
shifted from being in the foreground, as during my diagnosis, to being in the background. When it is in the
background I think I am no less happy, but a lot wiser than I was before I was ill.
This first person perspective became important to me. I felt that during my frequent dealings with medical
and healthcare professionals it was neglected. No one asked me what had changed in my life or what had I
had to give up because of my illness. Overlooking the lived experience of illness is a mistake because there
is so much important knowledge to be gleaned from it—for example, knowing that the most effective
intervention might be helping the patient to retain their everyday life despite their illness. The ultimate aim of
medicine is to help those who are ill regain their life, habits, and activities. But it is impossible to do this
without knowing about the patient’s usual life and how it has been affected by illness.As it turned out, the 10 year prognosis is now out of date. My family and I did a lot of research into the illness
and made contact with clinicians, researchers, and lymphangioleiomyomatosis organisations to get the best
advice. I joined three organisations, which were a source of support and information and gave me the
opportunity to assist in the search for a treatment. Joining a mailing list and meeting other women with
As it turned out, the 10 year prognosis is now out of date. My family and I did a lot of research into the illness
and made contact with clinicians, researchers, and lymphangioleiomyomatosis organisations to get the best
advice. I joined three organisations, which were a source of support and information and gave me the
opportunity to assist in the search for a treatment. Joining a mailing list and meeting other women with
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P026
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Cardiomyopathy

My journey started last autumn at work. Feeling “off colour” and nauseous, I went to my local accident and
emergency department. It was quite amusing because they took my temperature and it was so low they
asked me, “Are you alive?” I was admitted to the Royal Sussex County Hospital and stayed there for two
months, during which time I was diagnosed with cardiomyopathy.
The doctors asked me lots of intrusive questions, which didn’t help my feelings much; they implied that I
drank a lot. They thought I was drinking half a bottle of gin a day. Subsequently, I found I was the only person
of whom they asked these questions about my alcohol intake. It went round the ward like wild fire, and the
nurses suddenly labelled me an alcoholic. Obviously I felt guilty about the whole thing; I’d brought it on
myself. I was probably drinking about three bottles of wine a week. I really had cut it down, as previously Iwas drinking a bottle of wine a day. I knew I did have a problem and it had been ongoing for a number of
years. I think they forget that I’m a child of the ’80s, so no one was telling us how much to drink or smoke. I
keep trying to justify my cardiomyopathy; it may have been the drinking—that certainly contributed to it—but
there are other possible reasons, too. It could have been a viral illness. But there’s more guilt when it’s related
to alcohol, at least for me as a woman.
I feel guilty about drinking because it’s limiting my life. It’s brought me to the situation I’m in now. After I had
my pacemaker put in I had a stroke. I have very little understanding of what happened, but the doctors
wanted to go down the same path of believing it was my alcohol intake because it was convenient; it was a
good way to label me again. Everybody took the doctors’ word, not my word.After the stroke my left hand and leg were affected. So along with my breathlessness I now had an ugly side.
Ugly is a strong word. My self image is no longer my own. It’s not me anymore; it’s tubes and tablets. I don’t
look in the mirror anymore; the girl I see looks out with eyes that look ill. I don’t look nice. My body has
changed so much. Previously I was tall and quite athletic looking; now I’m small and I have to ask people for
help with everything.They told me it was my heart, but it actually made no difference to me, I’m quite a laid back person. I wasn’t
aware of a support group. You don’t get any support until they discharge you; which is odd. I could have
used the support earlier. I’ve had three heart failure nurses because I’ve moved wards so much; I’ve not built
up any sort of relationship with them. It might have helped if I’d had the same heart failure nurse throughout.
If I could give advice to someone with cardiomyopathy I would tell them to keep a notepad because doctors
talk very fast, especially men. In terms of coping, I would suggest watching lots of television and being
prepared to relinquish control to your carers as you will be stuck in bed, unable to do anything. I laugh with
my mum and friends because I’m classified as disabled and get the best seats on the bus and concessions
at the cinema.
I was told originally that I had six months to live but I’ve gone past that. In hospital my next of kin were called
as the doctors didn’t think I was going to make it, but I was never going to let that happen. I haven’t really
discussed it with my family but I suppose I should be thinking about my funeral. Night times can be
especially scary as you start to ruminate about what’s happened in the day.
I wonder where this year has gone and realise that I’ve spent it largely in hospital. It has been the most boring
period of my life.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P027
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Childhood asthma

I am a 15 year old girl, and asthma greatly affects my life and the lives of my family and friends. My mother
also has asthma, but my sister has now grown out of the condition. I was only 18 months old when I showed
the first signs of asthma. At first my mother thought it was a chesty cough, but it lingered for many weeks. In
addition, I was extremely wheezy and tight chested at times. My GP repeatedly assured my mother that there
was nothing to worry about and that it was only a cough. As my mother has had asthma all her life, she was
not convinced of this. Dissatisfied with the GP’s diagnosis, she took me to see a locum doctor, who
immediately recognised the symptoms of asthma. Because of our family history, he had me admitted to
Treliske Hospital in Truro. Consequently my mother decided to change to a new GP, who still looks after our
whole family.
I was put on a nebuliser twice a day for a week and given the steroid prednisolone. It was at this point that I
was diagnosed with asthma. As I was only 2 at the time, I cannot clearly remember going into hospital or
exactly what happened there. When I was first diagnosed it was an extremely stressful time as I did not know
what was happening to me. It was very frightening for my family to watch me suffer and was by far the most
worrying time for them. The staff at the hospital were all brilliant and offered as much advice as possible to
my mother, who stayed in the hospital with me. When I left hospital about two weeks later I had my first
home visit from an asthma nurse, who was a great support and provided helpful advice on how we should
continue my treatment. She also spent a lot of time teaching me how to use my inhalers correctly through a
spacer device.At the age of 3 I started preschool, which did not cause any problems as the staff were made aware of my
condition and were told how to supervise my use of my inhalers. However, when I started infant school,
things changed slightly. Some of the other children did not understand about asthma. Going through junior
school was extremely stressful at times as I was often bullied about my condition. Quite often members of
school staff are unaware of how to deal with an asthma attack. Living with asthma has often made me feel
out of place, and, in the past, I have had to take several days off school because of doctors’ appointments
and an inability to breathe. In addition, doing sports has caused problems with coughing fits, breathlessness,
and wheezing. The amount of exercise I could undertake used to be very limited, and I had to sit out during
physical education (PE) lessons, which again made me feel different from everybody else.During my last year of primary school I joined an after school dance club, which changed my life. The dance
club took place just once a week at first, and I needed to use my inhaler more frequently than normal, but I
loved it. I persevered, and over time I built up the number of lessons I took part in each week. Dancers are
taught how to breathe and relax in a different way in order to enable them to take in enough oxygen to move
quickly around the floor. Now at the age of 15, I have been dancing for five years. I train for 16 hours a week,
and my breathing and asthma have improved dramatically. Dancing has acted as a natural therapy, enabling
me to reduce the number of times I use my salbutamol inhaler. My dance teacher is fully aware of asthma in
dancers and has taken courses on how to deal with the problems it could cause.Over the years I have been prescribed many medicines to help with my asthma. Currently the only
medications I take are salbutamol and Seretide. To begin with I was given salbutamol and beclazone to
inhale through a spacer device. Originally, when I was very young, I found this difficult, but the treatment
seemed to be a success. As I grew older, this treatment seemed to work less and less. I was then given a
new type of inhaler—the Oxis Turbohaler. This was a complete failure, however, and I had to go back to
salbutamol and beclazone. In addition, I was given Singulair tablets to take before I went to bed to reduce
the number of times I needed to use my inhalers the next day. This was brilliant, and I soon found I was using
my inhalers only twice a day, once in the morning and once in the evening. Later I tried a new form of inhaler
to replace the beclazone—Seretide—which is easier to use and much more effective than beclazone. I visit
my doctor or asthma nurse every three months for a check up, to review my medication, and to ensure it is
still working.My asthma is triggered by a number of things, varying at different times in the year and depending on where I
am and on my surroundings. One of the main triggers for me is pollen, which gives me hay fever, for which I
have to take cetirizine. Now that I am getting older, my hay fever seems to be lessening in its severity. During
the winter, sudden cold air can trigger an asthma attack. If I get a cold, it quite often goes to my chest, and I
then need to take steroids and antibiotics. Possible other triggers include hairspray, dust, and aerosol
deodorants. Recently some girls at school were spraying large quantities of deodorant in the changing room,
which is small and windowless. In so confined a space, the hairspray triggered my asthma. I could not
breathe and was gasping for air. My teacher would not listen to my cries for help and told me to be quiet.
Fortunately, my best friend grabbed my inhaler from my school bag and took me out of the room. I very
nearly had a bad asthma attack that day.This is just one example of the sorts of situation I have been in. Similar incidents occur frequently in schools
and workplaces throughout the country. This is why my family and I feel that it is so important to publicise
asthma and make both adults and children fully aware of it and of the problems it can cause. In schools all
teachers should have relevant training in case someone in their class has an asthma attack, and asthma
should be recognised as the serious condition it is. We fully support the work done by the charity Asthma UK
to help improve awareness of this frightening and sometimes life threatening condition.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P028
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Communication during breast cancer treatment

When I began my second cancer journey in 1998 I was a professor in the faculty of medicine at a major
research university. As an experienced physiotherapist I had considerable knowledge about the disease,
having treated cancer patients in my early years of practice, and having experienced one less serious
episode of breast cancer already. Compared with many others who face this frightening diagnosis I was
considerably better “armed” to navigate the complicated cancer care system. Even so, although getting
through treatment—12 rounds of chemotherapy, five weeks of radiation, and four separate operations—was
my primary occupation, serving as my own navigator turned out to be a full time job.In my experience in Canada, and that of many of my cancer “colleagues,” cancer care occurs in a
hierarchical model. Each team member assesses the patient independently and produces an individual
report. All reports are then filed in that healthcare agency’s chart. It is unusual for there to be a case manager
or any team meetings. Most cancer patients, especially those with solid tumours, initially meet with a surgeon
who makes decisions independently of the oncologists. Once surgery is completed, the patient is referred to
one or more oncologists, who each provide independent advice. In essence, little “cross-talk” occurs, and
the patient is left to serve as his or her own case manager.
In my experience, this “silo” approach (a system that is unable to operate in conjunction with other systems)
became not only problematic, but also potentially dangerous, especially because more than one healthcare agency was involved, as is often the case in cancer care. In my first nine months of treatment (1998-9), I
interacted with 35 different health professionals at four hospitals or healthcare agencies (box 1)—none of
whom seemed to communicate with one anotherAfter my bilateral mastectomy (with placement of chest tissue expanders) in 1998, I developed skin flap
necrosis at the mastectomy site, thought to be the result of an infection. The next week, I was scheduled for
separate medical appointments with my surgeon, plastic surgeon, and medical oncologist, all at different
healthcare facilities. Each prescribed an oral antibiotic without realising that the others had also prescribed
one. Had I not been a health professional and realised that each was a different antibiotic, I might have taken
all three. As my own case manager, I was responsible for relaying this information to the three doctors.
During my second meeting with the medical oncologist, I was advised that I would need an
electrocardiogram before beginning chemotherapy. Once again, it was up to me to tell the oncologist that
this had been done two weeks earlier when I had my operation. Because of the lack of communication within
the team, it was up to me—the patient—to sift and transfer the information, and consequently, save precious
dollars in our socialised healthcare system by not undergoing a second electrocardiogram.There is a longstanding and widely prevalent myth that, especially during diagnosis of a life threatening
illness, patients do not hear and absorb what is being told to them because of heightened anxiety. In other
words, they are unable to filter and retain the bad news.
I had read about this “myth” and wanted to be fully prepared when I met the surgeon to hear my biopsy
results. I therefore took with me to the appointment a colleague who could listen objectively and take notes,
a notepad for myself, and a tape recorder. My surgeon was technically proficient and kind, but he was not a
good communicator. Although it was clear that further surgery would be the first step in my upcoming
treatment plan, neither my colleague nor I could figure out from his confusing explanation whether the
second treatment would be chemotherapy or radiotherapy. He finally drew a diagram to clarify the treatment
course. I have often wondered whether, if I played the tape recording to a group of medical students, they
would be as confused as my colleague and I had been.
Remembering that communication is a two way process and to stop blaming the patient for not being able to
“hear” is crucially important. Fortunately, most medical schools now provide training to enhance
communication skills, and our own cancer agency uses real patients to assist in this training for oncology
residents. Not only is there far too little communication among the various cancer care team members, but for
treatments involving different healthcare agencies or hospitals, patient assessment information and written
records are often not passed on to other facilities.
Immediately after I had my first operation in 1994, a nurse told my sister that I was being kept in the recovery
room longer than usual because of “difficulty breathing.” Because I was not planning on having future
surgery, I did not bother to ask what that “difficulty” was.
Three and a half years later, I visited a different hospital (within the same university based healthcare system)
for a preoperative assessment for the bilateral mastectomy scheduled for the next day. The anaesthetist
asked me about any previous problems with anaesthesia. I explained that I had experienced breathing
problems during my previous surgery but did not know their nature. Although the mastectomy was scheduled
to take place in a hospital within the same system, no records had been transferred between the two
hospitals. Fortunately, I overheard the anaesthetist asking to have the records faxed to him. However, it was
not until I was ushered into the operating room the next day that the anaesthetist confirmed receipt of the
operative records and that the “breathing difficulties” had been the result of a last minute surge of analgesics,
rather than any respiratory decline on my part. The last breath I took before the oxygen mask was placed
over my face was literally a sigh of relief.I encountered more than 30 healthcare practitioners during my second cancer journey. Most of them were
wise, compassionate, technically proficient, and had an evidence based approach, but they failed to function
as a team. I was left to be my own case manager, which involved sorting through and passing on the huge
amount of information received from each of them. I hope the tips and resources provided in this article
(boxes 2 and 3) will help to inform healthcare providers how better to serve patients who are being treated for
cancer and make the journey more navigable for the patients themselves.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P029
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Amyloidosis

I was diagnosed with amyloidosis in June 2010 at the age of
73. The sequence of events was interesting. I had been attending
the hospital for many months, seeing consultants in the
nephrology and respiratory departments, unfortunately to no
effect.
For several months my ability to walk long distances had been
impaired by extreme breathlessness: on a journey of 10 to 15
minutes’ duration I would have to stop 20 or 30 times to catch
my breath. At one point, after such a walk, I collapsed in a
synagogue—which was actually a good place to collapse, as I
was surrounded by many doctors.
After routine blood and urine tests at my general practitioner’s
surgery, my doctor telephoned me to say that she had spotted
something and made an urgent appointment at the haematology
department in my local hospital.
There, I was put through a battery of tests and was told my
results would be sent to the National Amyloidosis Centre for
examination. Of course, I had never heard of amyloidosis.
Before going to the centre, I had a bone marrow test—not the
most pleasant experience—and later, at the centre, I had various
other tests, including an electrocardiogram and a full body scan.
When the results of the tests and scan came through I was told
by the doctor at the centre that I had amyloidosis and that if I
did not receive treatment for it I would not last beyond the end
of the year.
My condition involves amyloid deposits in my kidneys, which
were working at 20% of the normal rate, and in my heart. The
heart wall was thickened and it is this that causes my
breathlessness. There are also amyloid deposits in my liver.
When I went back to the haematology department, the consultant
prescribed a regimen of pills for me to take. I was taking
between 20 and 30 pills a day. My wonderful daughters—I have
five—drew up a daily schedule for me with a cabinet into which
the pills were placed for me to take daily.
This continued for several months, but it became apparent both
to me and to my doctors that the pills were not having the
desired effect. Eventually, in October 2010, it was decided that
I should have an intensive course of chemotherapy with
bortezomib.
I cannot say that I have taken easily to the chemotherapy. I
generally feel pretty rotten after it has been administered, and
it leaves me totally exhausted. I have lost my appetite and have
the greatest difficulty in sleeping. I may sleep for an hour or
two but then be awake for the rest of the night. I have become
an expert on the BBC World Service, to which I listen while
others sleep.
In November 2010 one of my daughters got married. There was
considerable doubt among my family and friends as to whether
I would actually make it to the wedding. It was agreed that my
chemotherapy should be arranged so that I could take a week
off for the wedding, but to no avail; in the event, chemotherapy
was scheduled for the wedding day. However, I managed to put
it off, so I was present when my daughter got married. It was a
tremendous lift for me, and this feeling lasted for some time.
The lesson I drew from it is that it is always a bonus to have
something to aim for outside the medical situation, and the
wedding sustained me.
I have now completed five cycles of chemotherapy. I am told
there has been a dramatic improvement in my condition, and it
has been decided to bring the chemotherapy to an end. Hopefully
my amyloidosis will stabilise. If it does not, other options will
be considered.
I have every confidence in my haematologist and an absolutely
wonderful nurse, and my new nephrologist. I see the
haematologist every four or five weeks and the nephrologist
every two months. I also have checks every six months at the
National Amyloidosis Centre. I guess it will be some time before
I cease to have these appointments.However, since I stopped chemotherapy, I no longer have to
suffer the very unpleasant side effects of diarrhoea and
constipation. Indeed, there has been a real improvement in my
quality of life so that I am now able to sleep through the night
and my appetite has returned. I can walk further than before,
and the breathlessness, although still present, is no longer the
issue that it was before I was diagnosed and before
chemotherapy.
When I was originally diagnosed, my family faced the real
possibility of losing their husband and father. Naturally, stress
levels increased for all of us. I think we all decided to live each
day as it comes, not least because the alternative—to concentrate
on my imminent mortality—was not to be contemplated. I
myself certainly resolved to put that to the back of my mind.
I am grateful to my general practitioner, who set the process in
motion; she is a compassionate and caring doctor. And I consider
myself very fortunate, despite all the anguish my condition has
caused. Had this happened 15 or 20 years ago I would not have
been around to tell the tale. It is also a happy coincidence that
the National Amyloidosis Centre is located in my local hospital,
the Royal Free Hospital in London.
For all that, I do still harbour a strong resentment that so many
health professionals seem completely ignorant of amyloidosis.
I accept that it is a relatively rare condition, with only 500-600
new cases diagnosed in the UK each year; however, the disorder
is almost certainly underdiagnosed. My concern is that it simply
never occurred to the consultants in the nephrology and
respiratory departments to consider the possibility of
amyloidosis. It just was not on their radar. Indeed the nephrology
consultant said he did not understand why my kidney function
was declining and said, “I will see you in a year.” My response
was that I could be dead in a year! My respiratory consultant
suggested I have a lung function test and the result was normal.
Once again an alternative cause was never considered.
I am just one patient. Others may have different experiences,
but we all have one factor in common: there is no cure for
amyloidosis. It is potentially fatal. But research is currently
being undertaken to try to find a cure. I hope and pray that it
will not be too late for me. In the meantime, however, the
doctors manage the condition, so far with a fair degree of
success. They are a very devoted and committed group.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P030
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Synaesthesia

Fractions were the crunch. Up until then I got on fine. Then we started on decimal points and the more and
less signs. How do you have more orangey red or less bottle green? They are what they are, surely? It was
about then that I reckoned I wasn’t any good at maths. We moved into algebra, which turned into a greyish
slur on the whiteboard, and literally, to me, dripped off in a sort of slimy haze. Yet geometry was fabulous. I
could conjure up the shapes and work out the answers in my head in milliseconds; just don’t ask me to write
anything down. I do things in tens; they array in front of my face in sets, and I count them out. But I don’t
fathom dozens, pounds, pints, or anything else imperial. Thank goodness for American cookbooks.
I think I was about 15 years old when I mentioned to a friend that my numbers were colours, and she said I
was weird. So I didn’t tell anyone again for nearly 25 years. For most of that time I thought maybe I really was
weird and a bit mad. You see, it’s not only the numbers that have crossed over. Whole words are either
strong or weak shades, and I have the unnerving experience of my feelings presenting through bursts and
swirls of colour. I’ve developed my own systems and methods for working things out, and sometimes this
makes me look strange. When I’m stressed, I just open my hand and let the shopkeeper take the money as I
can’t count it out. Hardly anyone knows I struggle with counting; they see me as articulate and able.
Synaesthesia. Someone once explained that some of my senses had their wires crossed. For me it is as
normal as having 10 toes and 10 fingers. The journey I’ve been on is one of discovering that it isn’t normal for
everyone else and that some of the experiences I have lead to reactions and behaviour from other people
that have been difficult for me to understand and deal with. A combination of events led me to seek help, but
not initially for the synaesthesia—because of course I thought that was normal, and I didn’t even have aname for it.
A depression captured my body and mind, and I sought help. While the main priority was to understand and
treat the depression, it was during one of the visits to my psychiatrist that my synaesthesia was revealed.
While some things made sense at the time, not everything did—and I have since found the process of
therapy with a psychotherapist to be very useful in really helping me to understand more about the meaning
of what may be occurring. I know enough to understand that I have been fortunate to have a psychiatrist who
could diagnose the difference between my spatially and colour orientated synaesthesia and schizophrenia.
The two conditions are easily confused. Had I been diagnosed with schizophrenia, my life would have
changed greatly, and I am thankful for the time my psychiatrist took and the patience he showed in making
my diagnosis (box 2). So often emphasis is given to treatment, but for me the value has been in the
diagnosis. It was an “Aha!” moment that has enabled me to progress on a personal journey of learning about
how my perceptions work.
It feels like a personal process and not one that can be medicalised. I tap into a range of support systems as
I feel I need them. My doctors and I have experimented with various medications, not so much to treat the
synaesthesia directly but rather to treat related symptoms. I’ve found topiramate worked well as a mood
stabiliser and helped me find ways to manage day to day and to deal with the confusion that mixed senses
can bring. I no longer take this drug and now concentrate on sleeping well and minimising stress. Nothing
I’ve taken has changed my experiences, though some drugs can help me cope better with what I do
experience. I’ve noticed, however, that high doses of caffeine can make some colours seem a bit sharper.
This has been a very private process, unlike my experiences with other medical conditions. It feels unique to
me and difficult to describe to anyone else. I’ve chosen not to read widely about the condition. In fact what
little I have found on the web looks like rubbish and irrelevant. Sometimes, when I hear someone else talk in
a certain way, like “this drink smells pink,” I wonder whether they have similar experiences. But it’s not like
cancer. It doesn’t seem to be something you talk about or have support groups for. Perhaps that’s because,
for those of us who experience it, it feels so normal. It’s part of who we are.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P030
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: After repair of tracheo-oesophageal atresia

When my first feed in hospital resulted in coughing, choking,
and going blue, it was evident that I couldn’t swallow. I was
quickly transferred to a larger hospital and short gap
tracheo-oesophageal atresia and fistula was diagnosed. At the
time (1975), although repair of this condition had first been
performed in 1948, survival was far from guaranteed. However,
despite needing a thoracotomy and trans-sternal incision, the
repair was successful, and I left hospital three months later,
supposedly cured.Although I was the first child of my young parents, they quickly
realised I wasn’t normal. I slept very badly, choked, and
constantly coughed and was irritable and unwell most of the
time. Thus began my mother’s frequent visits to general
practitioners and (initially) paediatric surgeons. Because I was
a normal weight, doctors assumed my mother was simply
overprotective owing to my initial defect. In addition, my lungs
were always clear, so no infection was evident. The one
concession to the frequent visits was the diagnosis of reflux,
but at this time, Gaviscon was the only option.
In between visits to the doctor, my mother had to cope with
having a child with a near constant “TOF cough”: the TOF
(tracheo-oesophageal fistula) cough is a result of
tracheobronchomalacia and tracheal scarring, and sounds like
a seal barking. My mother was often accosted by strangers
chiding her for taking a child with obvious whooping cough out
in the streets, and people pointed and stared.
Despite the ungodly noises coming out of the child in front of
them, the doctors continually told us there was nothing wrong
with me, and no need for any investigations or treatment.Ignoring my frequent absences from school (I missed at least
two weeks each term) due to “chest infections” and the sequelae
of prolonged coughing (black eyes owing to petechial
haemorrhage, torn intercostals, and frequent haemoptysis), the
doctors did not acknowledge that I had any problem.By my late teens, I had internalised the unspoken message of
the consultations with doctors. I believed that I was a
hypochondriac or simply not as stoical as others and that this
explained my frequent absences from school and medical school.
Even when I questioned a paediatric surgeon at medical school
about whether there was any long term impact of TOF, I was
again told there were none.
My mind became closed to any suggestion of disease. Once I
started working as a doctor, colleagues suggested there might
be a problem, but I could not acknowledge it in the light of my
past experiences. When I was a house officer on call, my senior
house officer threatened to admit me as my oxygen saturation
levels were 92%, but I shrugged it off as a joke. A doctor
housemate complained I kept her awake all night coughing, but
as I slept fine, I thought she was over-reacting. It was not until
my consultant and the occupational health doctor insisted on a
respiratory opinion when I was 30 (after I had had four “chest
infections” in four months) that I was forced to accept there
might be a problem.
My first respiratory history revealed how deeply in denial I was
about the problem. It had not occurred to me that others do not
cough every day, cough up sputum daily, or suffer “infections”
as frequently as I did. A range of investigations revealed severe
tracheobronchomalacia and a fluid filled pouch at the base of
the trachea. At this point I was referred to the Liverpool
cardiothoracic unit. Further investigation there showed poor
oesophageal motility, that my trachea, oesophagus, and aorta
were stuck together, and my lungs were completely normal.
However, I was getting sicker and sicker as each investigation
exacerbated my chest problems.The discovery that I did have a real health problem had a major
psychological impact on me. I was extremely angry. I was angry
first at my senior colleagues for making me face up to the truth,
and then at all the doctors who had treated me in the past. I was
angry at the doctors not because they had not known what to
do, but because they were too arrogant to admit their ignorance
and seek further information, instead blaming my family and
me for the problem. No one could expect a GP to know what
the long term outlook of this new patient group would be, but
in refusing to accept there might be one, they failed me. The
cognitive dissonance that this anger caused was hard to deal
with. On one hand I was a hospital doctor treating patients, but
on the other, I resented the medical profession and the attitudes
that had brought me to this point. I also grieved for the child I
had been—the breathless toddler learning to speak quietly and
quickly in between coughs, the schoolgirl bullied for my
coughing, and the teenager cancelling social events owing to
ill health.
Although the doctor at the Liverpool cardiothoracic unit had
begun to improve things for me, the real turning point came
when I moved to Yorkshire. I was referred to Professor Morice’s
cough clinic. The first sign of what was to come was the reflux
severity index I completed on arrival. I quickly realised I scored
highly on all counts. When this was followed by a consultation
in which my condition was both understood and explained, and
a treatment plan devised, I felt hope for the first time in many
months. I learnt that my “chest infections” were episodes of
aspiration, hence their unresponsiveness to steroids, and my
other symptoms were manifestations of gastro-oesophageal
reflux. I was started on a range of medications, to see what
would control the symptoms, and I have found a regimen that
keeps things settled. I am still learning about my condition—at
a recent conference I learnt that the reason for my frequent
choking episodes is that in people with a tracheo-oesophageal
fistula the pharynx may also be dysfunctional, resulting in an
unsafe swallow. Such information doesn’t alter anything but
helps me understand my problems better. As I’ve improved, I
realise I am luckier than many with my symptoms, most of
which come from an irritant tracheitis, which has prevented
deeper damage, but others in similar situations develop chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease or bronchiectasis.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P031
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Ulcerative colitis

I remember being mortified at the thought of seeing a doctor
about a prolapsed haemorrhoid at the age of 23. My journey
had started in the summer of 2007, in central Asia, while I was
on a university work experience programme. For over a month
I suffered from constant diarrhoea. Everyone around me
explained that this was a normal part of travelling and that I
should try and see the funny side. However, I found the
symptoms intolerable. On my return to the UK a month later,
my general practitioner sent a sample for microbiology, which
came back positive. I was prescribed a single dose of antibiotic
and the diarrhoea improved.
However, over the following year (my final year of
undergraduate studies) I was never quite right. But I took too
long to back to a doctor about my bowel problems. By the time
I went to my GP in February 2009, during my MSc course, I
had been passing blood and mucus for about three months. My
delay in seeking further medical help was caused by the gradual
and intermittent onset of the symptoms and, of course, by my
own embarrassment.
When I went to see my new GP she sent me for blood tests,
which showed raised inflammatory markers, and referred me
for a flexible sigmoidoscopy. I had gradually become more and
more exhausted and everyday activities were requiring
increasing amounts of stamina. During my first degree I had
been a keen member of the hill walking club and had walked
10 Munros in a weekend; now a walk to the supermarket was
a struggle. I went back to see my GP and explained that I was
finding things very difficult, my abdomen was distended, and
my friends had told me I had turned grey. However, she said I
should wait for the flexible sigmoidoscopy at the hospital.
A couple of weeks after seeing my GP, while I was at home in
the house I shared with student friends, it felt as if my bowel
had prolapsed. I was then in the very unusual situation of having
to explain this to my new boyfriend. He insisted on having a
look and, not being a doctor, decided it looked like a large
prolapsed haemorrhoid. On seeing my toilet bowl filled with
blood and mucus, however, he took me to the Saturday drop-in
medical centre. I remember being mortified at the thought of
seeing a doctor about a haemorrhoid and I put a full face of
make-up on in an effort to make myself as attractive as possible.
In the accident and emergency department attached to the
drop-in centre, the doctor took my history—I explained the
raised inflammatory markers and the suspected inflammatory
bowel disease. He did a rectal examination, which was
incredibly painful, misdiagnosed an anal fissure, prescribed
Anoheal (diltiazem hydrochloride 2% cream), told me to chase
up my flexible sigmoidoscopy, and discharged me.
At this point I felt incredibly helpless and could feel myself
fading away. My boyfriend put me on a train to my parents and
I stayed there for the rest of the weekend. I spent Sunday on the
sofa and tried lying on my front on the floor to stop myself from
going to the toilet because it was so unbearable. On the Sunday
night I remember passing a continuous stream of blood for four
seconds. I could hardly move after this and struggled back to
bed. In the morning my mother came in to see me; she later told
me that for the first time she had realised what the critical care
nurses meant when they said a patient was “going off.”
My mother took me to the accident and emergency department
and I was sent in to see a doctor immediately. The doctor
ordered a full body x ray, admitted me to acute medical care,
and put me in the hands of the gastroenterologists. By this time
I was so weak that I could hardly lift my arm and needed all of
the electric features on the hospital bed. That afternoon I was
diagnosed by a consultant gastroenterologist as having ulcerative
colitis and was prescribed intravenous steroids. I was finally in
safe hands, where I needed to be, and getting treatment.Ironically, receiving the diagnosis of ulcerative colitis was not
one of the difficult points that stand out in my memory. I was
so happy to be in hospital that the diagnosis paled in comparison.
After three days in hospital my condition had completely
stabilised, in rather a miraculous fashion. However, after I had
left hospital and as my steroid dose was tapered down, the
ulcerative colitis relapsed and I had to go back into hospital for
six days of intravenous steroids. This was certainly a low point
as I came to understand the chronic nature of my illness.
Being prescribed azathioprine and reading the patient
information leaflet one night in the hospital was another low
point. The leaflet stated that a common side effect from
azathioprine was cancer. It suddenly sunk in how serious the
condition was if I had no choice but to take this cytotoxic
medication every day for the foreseeable future. However, six
weeks later I began projectile vomiting, so the azathioprine was
swapped for mercaptopurine.
The next difficult step was when I started to lose blood again,
in September 2009, despite being on mercaptopurine and a low
dose of steroids. I spent the week before a flexible
sigmoidoscopy in a terrified state, fearing that I would need a
colectomy. However, the sigmoidoscopy showed only mild
localised inflammation.
One of the most difficult things of all was taking steroids for
eight months: in the end I was desperate to come off them. I
had put on a huge amount of weight and my face had changed
so much that even close relatives did not recognise me.
The immunosuppressive cocktail of medication that I was taking
added another equally difficult hurdle: the proliferation of tiny
plantar warts on my face. I first went to my GP when I had one
wart, but this was not recognised and by the time I went back
I had over 10 warts on my face. This was the final straw. I had
gone from being a sporty young woman to one with a huge
round face with warts on it. Cream treatment and cryotherapy
provided some benefit but did not remove the one original and
very stubborn wart. Laser treatment was not approved for me
and the only remaining option was cautery and curettage.
Appalled at the thought of someone taking a scalpel to my face
I went to a private clinic and had my warts removed by
radiosurgery, a novel and unusual treatment I am told, but one
that worked excellently and has left me without scars.
It is now three years since I was diagnosed. The mecaptopurine,
mesalazine, and occasionally a rectal prednisolone foam have
more or less kept the ulcerative colitis under control, although
it is worse when I catch a cold, which happens more often as I
am immunosuppressed.
It has been an adjustment learning to live with a chronic illness,
learning not to push myself (contrary to all that training in the
Scottish highlands), and taking rest when it is needed. The
condition is debilitating, and in some respects the term
“disability” fits it better than “illness,” although describing
myself as disabled is something that I still have not come to
terms with. The inflammatory bowel disease specialist nurses
provide an excellent service, and expert help is only a phone
call or an email away.
I am now in my third year of a PhD in a laboratory researching
the production of recombinant proteins in mammalian cells.
Although my symptoms are managed so that I can live my life,
flare-ups still occur from time to time, which are short lived
and do not require admission to hospital but do necessitate time
out of the laboratory. If my ulcerative colitis did relapse
significantly I would like to think that monoclonal antibodies
would be offered to me before a colectomy.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P032
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: The missing vital sign

The paediatric bone marrow transplant team entered my 10
month old son’s isolation room for a second time one morning.
It was supposed to be Anderson’s “day of rest” between
chemotherapy and his transplant. As a physician, I knew
something was wrong—busy doctors do not do rounds twice.
They had returned to tell me that the umbilical cord blood
needed to cure my son of his rare condition, Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome, had been thawed a day early. The doctor who had
just finished his fellowship said that the early thawing would
not affect Anderson. He then went on to blame the lab, saying
that the “mistake probably happened because we don’t really
do many cord blood transplants here.” The nurse practitioner
told me that she thought it was likely a communication problem
and promised that “this will never happen again.”
At 4 months, Anderson had been diagnosed with the most severe
form of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, a genetically inherited,
immunodeficiency disease affecting 1/250 000 men. Children
with severe Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome die early of infection or
haemorrhage if not treated with a bone marrow transplant
(BMT). Children receiving a BMT from an unrelated donor or
via cord blood donation can be hospitalised for up to three
months—all in an isolation room because of the risk of infection.
My family had already endured a three week hospitalisation
when my son was only 1 month old, and I knew that I had to
develop a plan to take care of not only Anderson, but also my
4 year old daughter, my husband, and myself, physically and
emotionally, during this marathon.
In stereotypical doctor fashion, I do not normally ask people to
help me, nor do I prioritise taking care of myself. But facing an
extremely long hospital stay with a critically ill infant and having
an energetic (and thankfully healthy) 4 year old, I overcame my
default tendencies. I knew the evidence that children do well,
physically and emotionally, if their parents are doing well. So,
my husband and I developed a plan for self care and family care
based on discussions with the BMT team, families who had
experienced BMTs, child psychologists, colleagues, and friends.
We prioritised seeing both of our children every day, getting a
good night’s sleep at home at least every other night, having
breaks from the hospital to spend time together, and scheduling
time to exercise. We created a detailed weekly schedule and
asked family, friends, and colleagues to help us with child care,
laundry, and other household chores. Thanks to the “Lotsa
Helping Hands” website, many of our friends and relatives
signed up to have dinner delivered to our home every night, and
gifts given to our floor nurses every week.
Despite all of our planning, the love showered on us by family
and friends, and support from the BMT providers, nothing could
prepare us for the reality of the hospitalisation. Until I began
“living” on the BMT unit, I hadn’t really understood what it
was like to be on the other side of the patient-provider
relationship. It opened my eyes to the universe of fear and
vulnerability—where healthcare providers are in complete
control, and patients (even those who are doctors) are at their
mercy across a wide logistic and emotional divide.
The disclosure of the premature thawing of Anderson’s cord
blood was just one example of a missed opportunity to bridge
the emotional gap. Most patients want honest discussions and
the opportunity to express their feelings about bad news.
Unfortunately, the initial “bad news” discussion failed on both
counts. When they told me the blood was thawed early, I was
petrified that Anderson had lost his chance to live. It took all
of my strength not to slap both clinicians and just scream. After
the team left, the physician in me needed to mobilise: I contacted
the lab supervisor at a major academic medical centrespecialising in cord blood transplantation to understand the
gravity of this situation. Although this expert gave me
information that reassured me, the phone call that day from our
primary doctor, the chief of BMT who was on vacation at the
time, really eased my worry. He apologised (using the words
“I’m sorry”), took the time to explain why it was OK to do the
transplant a day early, and said “Anderson will be just fine.” In
addition, the mother in me received the most important gift of
all … a nurse gave me the space and permission to cry.
In another example, despite the scores of publications outlining
the importance of sleep, there is an unfortunate disregard for
sleep in all hospitals. Getting a 10 month old to sleep can be
challenging at the best of times. Add chemotherapy, pain,
nausea, fevers, and vital sign checks every four hours—and the
sleep routine becomes extraordinarily complex. With additional
interruptions—such as second year residents “eyeballing” the
child at 9 pm, noisy intravenous line changes at 10 pm, or a
dermatology fellow conducting a late night exam and
biopsy—the situation becomes a nightmare. I understand there
are excellent clinical reasons for these interruptions—especially
for critically ill children—but hospitals must start paying more
attention to protecting the sleep of their patients and their carers,
which could improve clinical outcomes and reduce emotional
stress.
Feeling absolutely no control over this life and death situation,
my husband and I struggled constantly with emotions such as
vulnerability, fear, and anger. As a psychiatrist, I knew these
feelings were normal, but there was no mental health
professional on the BMT team assigned to help us. Social
workers were available, but they seemed to deal with the
“problem cases,” not the “easier” ones such as ours. Child life
specialists made my son’s daytime life “normal,” but they did
not attend to my emotions. Thankfully, I had my own
psychiatrist, my husband, my parents, and friends to turn to for
the emotional support I needed. Many families are not so
fortunate.
It struck me again and again that, because of the increasing
complexity of medical care, doctors do not seem to have the
time to take the “emotional temperature” of patients or their
carers during prolonged hospitalisations, nor are providers
thinking critically about essential, patient centred concerns to
facilitate wellness. In my opinion, we were treated at the best
paediatric BMT unit in the country, but the empathic failures
made me wonder about the emotional experience for families
at other hospitals.
I believe that doctors who are treating children for prolonged
periods should ask the parents how they are feeling about being
in the hospital every day. If this is unreasonable given time
constraints, then add a team member to fill this role. Again,
there is plenty of evidence that children do better if their parents
are emotionally grounded. By not being asked, parents may
have the impression that the doctors don’t care, and clinicians
may miss important warning signs of parental depression or
anxiety that could negatively affect outcomes for critically ill
children.
About a week after the transplant, the chief of paediatric BMT
visited us on the day he returned from vacation. By that point,
it was clear that the cord blood cells had been in optimal
condition, so the mistake did not seem to have ramifications.
That said, it was obviously still on our minds. Without
ceremony, his first words to me were, “Hi, Mom, how are you
doing? Do you need a hug?” As a psychiatrist, I was taught not
to hug my patients, but at that moment I did need a hug, and I
needed it from him. I needed it from my son’s doctor, the person
we were counting on to save his life, the person who was
supposed to help us through this terrible ordeal. Although his
bedside manner is not generally “touchy-feely,” our doctor knew
that I needed him to cross the doctor-patient-parent boundary.
His small gesture took no extra “resources” and little extra time.
Yet, it instantly made me feel better; and is ultimately what
makes him not just good, but a great doctor.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P033
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Whooping cough

Recently I had whooping cough. This has now been 
confirmed by the results of a blood test. I was in little 
doubt about the diagnosis from the beginning. However, my experience suggests that, despite considerable literature on the prevalence of whooping cough in 
adults, the diagnosis is still not one that doctors readily 
think of when they are faced with an adult rather than 
an infant or child.
I can well understand why the general practitioners I saw in the first couple of weeks did not diagnose 
whooping cough at once. I am aware that the duration 
of the symptoms, as well as the nature of the symptoms 
themselves, is important, and there were more obvious diagnoses that sprang to mind. However, when I 
experienced the first two or three terrifying paroxysmal 
coughing sessions, I knew it was a cough unlike anything I had had previously and said so. It also reminded 
me of my daughter’s whooping cough when she was 
a toddler, many years ago. I was also very struck by 
the information on the website of Dr Doug Jenkinson 
(www.whoopingcough.net), which gave descriptions 
that matched my symptoms exactly. As a result, I 
spoke to the general practitioner who had first seen me 
and asked if he thought it could possibly be whooping 
cough. I also asked another general practitioner whom 
I saw a week or so later. In both cases their answer was 
similar: it was unlikely to be whooping cough as it is 
rare in adults.
On a visit to a chest clinic soon after this, I again 
raised the possibility of whooping cough. Once more 
this was thought to be highly unlikely. It was only on 
my return visit, when I felt just about well enough to 
be a bit more assertive, that my repeated suspicion was 
acted on and blood was sent for testing. I think this 
happened partly because I provided the doctor with a 
copy of Dr Jenkinson’s printout for doctors—a doctor to 
doctor communication always goes down best.
What are the lessons from my experience? Firstly, 
even allowing for the maxim, “If you hear hoof beats, 
think horses, not zebras” whooping cough in adults 
is actually not so rare. It is better described as underdiagnosed, rather than uncommon. Secondly, as an 
adult with a long history of asthma, I felt that it was 
automatically assumed that any respiratory illness 
must somehow be related to my asthma. Although this 
is understandable as the early days of my whooping 
cough were accompanied by a flare-up of asthma, I 
think it may have been a factor in doctors not being 
sufficiently open to other, additional possibilities. Interestingly, the asthma nurse in general practice was not so 
sceptical of my self diagnosis. She agreed that whooping 
cough was relatively uncommon, but she accepted that 
that did not make it impossible. Significantly, I think 
she was also more attuned to believing that I knew 
and understood my own asthma, and if I said that this 
cough was different from all the other bouts of asthma 
and all the other chest infections I had ever had, then I 
was probably correct in my observation.
Would an earlier diagnosis have made any difference, 
given that no effective treatment is generally available? 
From a patient’s perspective, I say that it would have 
been helpful, not least as I could have taken greater 
steps to avoid infecting others. Also, I inferred that I 
was heading towards a situation where invasive tests 
such as bronchoscopy were beginning to be considered—looking for something that wasn’t there—rather 
than first considering less invasive testing for something 
that, as it turned out, was there.
From a personal point of view, it was interesting and 
salutary to be reminded how difficult it can be to have 
a sensible discussion about our own health at a time 
when we feel like crawling under the duvet and staying there. I work as an independent researcher and 
policy consultant on health service issues. I am also a 
non-executive director of an NHS trust. None of this 
counted for much when I had only enough energy to 
cough.The good news is that when whooping cough was 
finally diagnosed, the consultant kindly said that it was 
a “learning point” for chest physicians in the hospital. 
In primary care the practice nurse asked if she could 
discuss my experience at a practice meeting where they 
considered how they could do things better and differently. Since no one can be expected to get it right 
all of the time, I guess that’s about as good as it gets, 
and I appreciated their humility. I also hope that my 
experience, and theirs, will make it less likely that quite 
so many other cases of whooping cough in adults will 
be missed.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P034
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: How no one acted when they should have

In June 2011, aged 79, I was admitted to the orthopaedic ward
of my local NHS teaching hospital for a revision of a loose 14
year old hip replacement. I was clerked in by an orthopaedic
associate specialist but no anaesthetist arrived.
Next morning I met the consultant anaesthetist and the surgeon
in the anaesthetic room. I recognised the anaesthetist as having
given me a spinal block for a previous knee replacement. He
proposed a combined spinal and epidural block with heavy
sedation, to which I agreed.
I was returned to the ward about 4 pm. The orthopaedic associate
came to tell me that all had gone as planned, and he confirmed
my ability to raise and extend my legs. When the nurse started
my routine checks I told her that I was completely numb in and
around my groin. Later my wife was present when I again told
nurses of my numbness. We were reassured by their explanation
that the area was the last to recover and this might be delayed
by the epidural pain relief. Even then I remembered I had not
experienced this when I had my knee done.
When it was time to sleep I advised the nurse that I had not
passed urine but had no desire to do so. As I was on intravenous
fluids, I was surprised when I woke the next morning at about
6 am that I didn’t need a bottle. However, I could palpate a
suprapubic swelling, which I assumed was my bladder, even
though pressure on it was not uncomfortable. I asked for a doctor
as I believed I needed catheterisation. About 8 am a junior doctor
arrived. After palpating my abdomen he called for a catheter
tray and relieved me of about 1.5 litres of urine, with me
unaware of any manipulation. Leaving me with an indwelling
catheter attached to a bed bag, he departed without, it turned
out, making any record in the notes or reporting to a senior
doctor.
As it was a Friday, I expected a visit from the orthopaedic team,
but only a specialist nurse in pain relief came to see me. I had
minimal discomfort. In the afternoon I found I was lying on a
wet sheet, with copious mucus covering my buttocks. As the
nurses changed the sheet they discovered that the epidural tube
had come out of my back which must have contributed to the
wetness. That evening in my wife’s presence I told the nurses
my numbness was unchanged despite the loss of the epidural
at an unknown time. One nurse suggested I would soon recover
if she got into bed with me. I was amused, my wife was not.
On Friday night I could not sleep and requested night sedation,
for which the duty doctor was called. When he arrived, after
considerable delay, he was the same doctor who had passed my
catheter. I learned that he was the general surgical foundation
year 2 doctor covering orthopaedics out of hours.
On Saturday morning, my only visitors were a specialist nurse
from orthopaedics, who said he would ring the anaesthetist, and
the pain relief nurse. Subsequently I learned the anaesthetist
was on annual leave and unavailable. By now I was aware of
the uncomfortable numbness involving my buttocks and
posterior thighs. Gas bubbles escaped in the mucus between my
legs.
Sunday continued in a similar vein, with me confined to bed by
foot pumps and without any medical visit. When my wife arrived
in the late afternoon I told her of my increasing concern at being
unable to raise medical interest in my condition, the aetiology
of which had to be more complicated than delayed epidural
recovery. My wife spoke to a houseman, who told her my
problems would be dealt with on Monday.
When my wife returned home, she rang our daughter, a
consultant rhinologist. She rang the ward and was told that the
registrar could not be called because I was not an emergency.
My daughter fortunately was able to ring the orthopaedic
consultant at home to ask him, “What is wrong with my father?”
About 9 pm, three junior doctors came in turn, armed with pins
to contemplate the possibility of a cauda equina syndrome. On
Monday morning I had a visit from my orthopaedic consultant,who ordered that I be starved in case of the need for further
surgery. I then had an emergency magnetic resonance scan, and
in the early evening the report was reviewed by a spinal surgeon,
who told me of a haematoma lying posteriorly at L1-L2 and
that he considered surgical decompression was not justified.
The window of opportunity to bring a possible early recovery
thus remained closed.
Space limitation does not allow the description of the
unpleasantness of the two and a half weeks I spent in hospital.
Care of incontinence was not on the same level as the kindness
of the nurses. The urinary bed bag was changed to a flip-flow
valve and, after discharge, to intermittent catheterisation. Both
were easy to forget in the absence of bladder sensation, which
led to several “accidents” when abdominal pressure was
raised—for example, when standing or coughing.
After discharge, four episodes of haematuria, one of which
caused an emergency admission, resulted in prolonged
antibiotics and an attempt by my excellent urologist to get me
off clopidogrel. Eight months after the operation I have stopped
using catheters. My bladder started to function weakly at about
seven weeks after surgery and gradually improved. It remains
weak and lacks sensation. When I stand, a pain-like sensation
tells me I must urinate. Fifteen minutes later I can pass almost
the same amount again.
The back end remains a problem. I am not incontinent but I
have some problems differentiating between gas and solids. The
district incontinence service introduced me to the self
administered Peristeen rectal washout system, paid for, as were
the urinary catheters, by my general practice’s budget. Now that
the rectal catheter has been redesigned and the balloon does not
burst, this is an excellent system, which prevents “accidents.”
However, the process is time consuming and there is a learning
curve. I cannot empty normally but require the combination of
abdominal muscle contraction, manual compression, and
agitation of the abdomen. I use the Peristeen system almost
every day.
The profound saddle anaesthesia has made a partial recovery.
The perineal and buttock areas are dulled and paraesthesic. The
perianal tissues have sensation but this is abnormal and the area
feels isolated from the surrounding tissue. There is no sensation
produced by the passage of solids.
Initially I seemed to be sitting on a log that was very
uncomfortable. Now the sensation is of sitting on a leather strap
with my tuberosities unprotected. The literature states the elderly
male has a poorer prognosis for a full recovery with this
presentation. Time will tell. Happily my hip functions reasonably
well and I am due to have a knee replacement in about a month’s
time.
NHS healthcare delivery is rarely out of the media and there
are frequent reports of misadventure.1 Medical students are
apparently trained in teamwork and communication but not in
the care of the ill. The presidents of the Royal College of
Physicians and the Royal College of Surgeons have warned of
the effect on junior doctors of the European Working Time
Directive, shift work, days off, reduced hours, and clinical
experience. Doctors’ numbers may have increased but not their
expertise. Similar problems exist in the nursing profession as
nurses train to do the work that was previously the remit of
doctors while leaving nursing to healthcare assistants.
The secretary of state for health has recognised there are
problems in the NHS at weekends owing to the absence of senior
doctors. My recent difficulties result from all of the above.
Additionally there is a failure to train doctors and nurses
adequately. If the discipline of anaesthesia recognises that
central nerve blocks can cause complications with serious
implications for patients, all of the staff who provide
postoperative care must be trained to recognise them. Reluctance
to contact senior staff for advice must be eliminated. Note taking
and communication between nurses, between nurses and junior
doctors, and between junior and senior doctors require
rethinking. If consultants stop doing ward rounds and
supervising junior doctors, it is necessary to redefine who is
ultimately responsible for patient care. Instead of spending vast
sums settling negligence claims (£1bn in 2010), would this
money not be better used to provide increased staffing and
training, particularly for out of hours care? As a non-medical
friend said to me, “If they can’t even look after you, who will
they look after?”
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P035
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Living with alkaptonuria

Simon Laxon, who was diagnosed with a rare genetic disorder,
alkaptonuria, soon after birth, describes his journey in
understanding the condition and finding hope for a cure
I was born in 1966, and within a few days of my birth my
parents knew that something was wrong. There were dark purple
stains in my nappies, so my mother took me to a consultant at
my local hospital for investigation.
After a meeting of specialist doctors, one of my nappies was
sent for tests. The doctors suspected porphyria, but the test came
back negative. A urine test led to the discovery of a rare genetic
disorder. The doctors explained it would cause a type of arthritis:
not crippling like rheumatoid arthritis, but one that would cause
aches and pains as well as turning the cartilage in my ears blue.
My parents felt there was no need to worry, so I grew up fairly
normally. I was quite athletic at school and trained several times
a week.
In 1987 I developed a duodenal ulcer and had to go into hospital,
where doctors rediscovered the genetic disorder (my original
records had been lost). This time a name was put to it:
alkaptonuria. The doctors knew little about it, but told me I
would develop mild arthritis and that my urine would turn black
if left to stand. We explained about the meeting of the specialists
when I was only a couple of weeks old and the stained nappies.
The doctors said that this was a symptom of alkaptonuria and
was nothing to worry about, as the genetic defect was harmless.
It took me a year to overcome the ulcer. By this time I was
starting to suffer with aches and pains in my lower back. I found
that I could not get back into a physically active lifestyle because
my body hurt so much after every attempt. At the time I did not
realise how much damage this disorder would do to me.
I found that the pain and stiffness were starting to affect my
work. I was a brake prototype engineer, working underneath
vehicles. I would spend a lot of time bending or crouching and
noticed that my back became very stiff and ached to the point
where I would have to stop work. If I sat down for a long period
of time, I would not be able to stand up straight for at least 10
minutes because of the stiffness.
In 1997 I started to get severe pain in my lower back. My doctor
told me to rest, but after the pain worsened he referred me to a
specialist rheumatologist. I was sent for a radiograph of my
back, which led to a diagnosis of degenerative disc disease. The
rheumatologist told me nothing could be done and discharged
me.
The pain still interfered with my job, so my works manager sent
me to a private physiotherapist. After an examination the
physiotherapist referred me to an orthopaedic surgeon, as he
suspected anklyosing spondylitis. A few weeks later, I collapsed
with intense pain in my lower back. I was taken to hospital and
admitted for 10 days. A magnetic resonance imaging scan
showed degeneration of the cartilage in my lower back. I was
told again that the problem was mechanical back strain and
degenerative disc disease and that nothing could be done. I was
discharged from hospital but was unable to work—as a result
I lost my job.
In 1998 I was invited to meet a geneticist, Victor McKusick,
from Johns Hopkins University. He told me that alkaptonuria
does cause early onset arthritis as well as a vast number of other
problems. He took photographs of my ochronotic ear cartilage
and explained that my black earwax was also due to
alkaptonuria. He confirmed that it was to blame for the pain in
my joints. Armed with this information I went back to my doctor
who referred me to another rheumatologist.
My new rheumatologist had experience of treating patients with
alkaptonuria, so he knew that my problems were connected. He
wanted to see me every three months and take blood and urine
samples for testing. A year later he retired and the
rheumatologist who took over from him still treats me to this
day. He is aware of the destructive nature of alkaptonuria and
regularly sends me for blood, urine, and bone density tests.In December 1998 my pain management doctor performed a
spinal manipulation, which made the pain worse. We decided
to look into spinal injections as an alternative. Since then I have
had over six facet joint injections. These seem to ease the pain
for an average of six months.
In January 1999 I started to feel unwell. I suffered more back
pain and had trouble urinating. I was tested for infections but
nothing showed up. I mentioned to the doctors that alkaptonuria
could sometimes cause prostate stones. In May I went into
hospital for a cystoscopy. My doctor managed to scrape some
calculi from the surface of my prostate. They were probably
caused by alkaptonuria. So far I have had two stones removed
and regularly pass small, black, gravel-like stones.
In 2000 I was searching the internet for alkaptonuria research
when I came across an article by Charles Scriver of McGill
University in Canada. I made contact and he sent me a copy of
the paper he had written on alkaptonuria. I kept in touch and
found that another patient in the UK wanted to set up a website
dedicated to helping those with alkaptonuria. He put me in touch
with Robert Gregory, who is now the manager of the AKU
Society in the UK. I signed up and have been a member ever
since. Their aim, and that of Lakshminarayan Ranganath and
his team at the Royal Liverpool University Hospital, is to find
a cure for alkaptonuria.
I also came across the National Institute of Health (NIH) in the
United States. They were looking for people to take part in a
new study on nitisinone, an unlicensed drug that prevents the
accumulation of the homogentisic acid that causes the damage
in alkaptonuria. I contacted them and in February 2001 I flew
out to the NIH. I spent the next week having a vast array of tests
before flying home.
In 2004 I had arthroscopy on my knees. My orthopaedic surgeon
told me that my left knee showed signs of ochronosis, but my
right one looked normal. To date, I have had a further three
arthroscopies and a meniscus repair.
In June 2005 I was asked to return to the NIH. This time I was
to participate in the study of nitisinone and return every four
months for follow-up appointments. While on nitisinone I felt
normal again. All the pain seemed to disappear and the stiffness
seemed to ease completely. I could play games with my
children—something that I could not do before—and we were
a normal family. This seemed to happen after being on the drug
for only a week, and continued for the four years I was on it. I
was deeply saddened when I received an email from the NIH
saying that they were to stop the trial. It felt that this was the
only hope that we had, as an AKU Society, and now that was
gone.
Last year I travelled to the Royal Liverpool University Hospital
to take part in their alkaptonuria clinical evaluation programme
under Dr Ranganath, a consultant in metabolic medicine. I
stayed at the hospital for three days while scans, radiography,
and other tests were performed. Work like this is helping to
advance medical knowledge about alkaptonuria. Without this
glimmer of hope, future alkaptonuria sufferers face years of
severe pain and joint replacements. We are hoping a cure will
be found so that future generations will not have to go through
what we have.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P036
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Anorexia nervosa

I was recently asked to sum up my experience of anorexia nervosa in one sentence—actually, I can do it in
just one word—isolation. This may seem surprising, but when you have spent a decade fighting an illness
that forces you to go against the natural instinct to protect yourself, and that creates a life so constrained by
rules that it is impossible to live normally, you feel completely alone. Anorexia makes you change your view of
yourself, always to one that is highly negative. Reversing this is a challenge, and one that is easily
underestimated. I have had to rise to this challenge while at medical school, and now that I have finished my
training I have begun to reflect on how anorexia has affected me and how lucky I have been to overcome it. I
wrote the following while I was very ill in hospital. It gives an insight into the pervasive nature of anorexia and
why it has the highest mortality of any psychiatric condition:
“I am stuck in a black hole I have dug for myself. It is entirely my fault. I am fat, useless and hopeless. I want
to get better, but it is hard to make positive decisions when the anorexic thoughts are making me obey their
rules. Some describe the anorexia as a gremlin on their shoulder, but I think it’s more like something
infiltrating my mind, putting in negative thoughts whenever there is a momentary gap. The ‘voice’ isn’t like a
hallucination though, as the thoughts are like any others I might have, and I know that they are my own. The
problem is that the urges not to eat, to stay thin and feel safe penetrate every waking moment. I have no
respite; it is an endless bloody battle in which I am always on the losing side.”
I was a typical victim of anorexia—a high achieving, perfectionist, middle class teenager to whom no one would have thought it would happen. But it did; a gradual two year descent into severe food restriction,
overexercise, deviance, and my own little anorexic world. I was 15 years’ old and extremely weak by the time
a diagnosis was made, and it was the first time I had heard of anorexia nervosa. When I received the news it
had little effect on me—I was so entrenched in the desire to lose weight and stay inside the “safe” place that
anorexia had provided that I couldn’t see beyond the next meal, let alone consider my prognosis. I was in
complete denial, insisting that nothing was wrong. For my family it was an enormous shock, not just the
diagnosis of a mental illness, but the feeling of helplessness at not being able to feed their own child.I had first visited my general practitioner several months previously because I was concerned that my periods
had stopped. He was very approachable and suggested I start the oral contraceptive. I left feeling confused,
but dutifully redeemed the prescription and started the pill. I was extremely underweight, so it was
unfortunate that the diagnosis was missed, because the anorexia was gradually getting worse. Anorexia
commonly presents as amenorrhoea, constipation, or chronic fatigue. Because patients with eating disorders
lack insight into their condition and early diagnosis is associated with a good prognosis, doctors should
always keep these conditions in mind.
Later that year I was referred as an emergency to the adolescent mental health services. There my parents
and I were seen by a psychologist, who made the diagnosis and offered us advice on home refeeding and
family therapy sessions. This is standard management of an adolescent with anorexia, but my experience
makes me feel that direct referral to a specialist eating disorders team would have been much more helpful.
Because of the lack of inpatient facilities in my area, my family was left to manage the situation at home. My
parents’ perseverance against the stubbornness and deviousness born of anorexia allowed me to reach a
safe weight, but I received no help in tackling the causes behind my illness. My family had been assured that
my recovery hinged on weight gain (true), with the suggestion that this would be sufficient for me to regain
full health (false). When I left home for university I quickly relapsed, which was upsetting for my family. I think
it is important to make it clear that recovering from an eating disorder is extremely difficult, and to warn the
family of the risk of relapse.My illness has followed a course typical of anorexia—a slow development into the full blown clinical
syndrome, followed by several relapses despite extensive treatment. Prognosis is usually quoted as the “rule
of thirds”—a third fully recover, a third partially recover, and another third have chronic problems. Recovery is
slow—it usually takes three to six years. I have had multiple courses of cognitive behavioural therapy and
received day patient and inpatient care. As an inpatient I was put on a specialist programme combining
refeeding with intensive therapy designed to reduce eating disordered behaviours and improve self esteem.
With each course of treatment I made steps towards recovery, but each time I quickly relapsed, because I
refused to admit that to succeed I needed to leave the illness completely behind. I believed initially that
weight gain would make the “voice” go away, and I know it can happen, but for me it hasn’t. I still have the
disordered thoughts, but I try not to act on them, and they are gradually weakening. I always tell others that
no hospital or specialist can cure them—they can help initiate changes, but the legwork is done at home, day
after day, by resisting the anorexia until you gradually start to win the battle (box)When I was deeply entrenched in anorexia, it was difficult to motivate myself to do anything. My concurrent
depression heightened this problem, and I struggled to meet the commitments needed to progress through
medical school. It has taken me eight years to complete my training, during which time my friends have
qualified and left me behind. Dropping behind my peers has worsened my feeling of inferiority, and I found it
difficult to fit into a new year group. This made me feel very alone, and the safety of anorexia beckoned
strongly. I have found that most people ignore the anorexia completely, pretending it isn’t there—this is
especially true of clinicians. Those friends that have stuck by me have provided invaluable support and
helped me adapt to my changed circumstances. My relationship with my family has been very strained at
After 10 years, I have finally reached the stage where I can maintain a healthy weight, manage my clinical
commitments, and engage in normal relationships. I am by no means completely cured of anorexia—I still
fight it daily and feel enormously fat and inferior—but I have turned the corner. Recently, I fractured my
patella from a fall, a painful reminder that I have been left with osteoporosis, a common consequence of
malnutrition.
No one knows exactly why an eating disorder develops, but when you have endured one the answer
becomes irrelevant. I have started putting large amounts of time into raising awareness of the dangers of
anorexia—especially among other doctors—both as an aid to my recovery and to prevent others from having
to face such an isolating experience.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P037
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Post-traumatic stress disorder after intensive care

Endless days and nights filled with strange broken sleep. A sea
of fragmented menacing faces and shadows swimming through
erratic beeps and bells. A large cackling face floating over me,
constantly morphing and changing shape. The staring old lady
in the bed opposite, her sallow skin disintegrating, eyeballs
disappearing to reveal deep dark holes from which cockroaches
crawled. Her weary face melting like wax into a big grey
smudge. Deafening, haunting laughter filling every space. Blood
seeping through holes and cracks in my skin, forming a puddle
of red around me. Small insects scuttling up my arms and legs.
My chest locked to the bed with wires and straps, as a plastic
mask repeatedly smothered me. A strangling sensation around
my neck. A warm metallic taste. An invisible force pinning my
body down as a dark curtain was drawn closed.
These are my memories of intensive care. They formed the
fabric of reality that I would take forward and recall vividly in
my dreams for many months afterwards. Such fragmented
delusional memories made it extremely difficult to understand
and make sense of what really happened to me. This prevented
my psychological recovery and led to the development of
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).In July 2011 I was coming towards the end of my foundation
training, fit and excited about an upcoming month off and a trip
to trek Mount Kilimanjaro. My day started as any other,
struggling through a ward round, but ended as a patient intubated
in intensive care. I had had an asthma attack, which was treated
aggressively with salbutamol. Unfortunately my body reacted
to the large dosage and I was pushed into severe metabolic
acidosis, with exhaustion, cardiac arrhythmia, and several
biochemical imbalances as a result. I required supportive
treatment in intensive care for many days.
While on the intensive care unit a combination of my illness,
unnatural environment, sedatives, and opioids caused me to
experience visual and tactile hallucinations and to feel extreme
anxiety and confusion. I was repeatedly prescribed sedatives
when I had episodes of chest pain, altered limb sensation, panic,
and breathlessness. I now understand that a lot of these
symptoms were caused by extremely high lactate levels, yet at
the time I was offered no explanation and made to feel an
anxious nuisance who could be silenced with a benzodiazepine.
Ironically this would only increase my future delirium and
confusion. My stay in the unit was prolonged while awaiting
the availability of a lower dependency bed. As a result I became
increasingly aware of my dynamic environment and formed
vivid memories of surrounding sights, smells, and sounds.
PTSD has traditionally been associated with traumatic stressors
such as combat, violent assault, and survival of natural disasters.
Recently there has been increased awareness of symptoms
occurring after critical illness and injury. Following a stay in
intensive care, 1 in 10 patients develop symptoms of PTSD. It
is one of the most common and most distressing, yet least talked
about, problems associated with intensive care medicine. I had
no warning about this association on my discharge. As a doctor
I felt I was expected to be strong so initially hid my feelings of
vulnerability and anxiety. I avoided speaking about what had
happened. I didn’t want to get upset, upset anyone else, or return
to the uncomfortable memories.Unbeknown to me at the time, the symptoms of PTSD can
commonly take weeks to months to manifest. By this time I had
started a rotation in a tertiary neonatal intensive care unit, with
constant reminders of the intensive care environment. Gradually
the sights, noises, and smells overwhelmed me. Flashbacks
became increasingly intrusive. At night I dreaded going to sleep,
as I would have vivid dreams where I was being intubated while
fully conscious but unable to communicate. I experienced
repeated sensations of suffocation and would awake coughing,
breathless, and drenched in sweat. Usually a placid person, I
began to feel very anxious, irritable, and easily startled. I
couldn’t concentrate for any length of time and found myself
“blanking off” frequently. After finishing a particularly busy
shift, my chest became tight, my heart raced, and I became
breathless. Feeling completely helpless and almost hysterical I
knew I could not return to the hospital.
One of the key symptoms of PTSD is avoidance of any
reminders of the stressor, and I took this to the extreme. I would
make detours while travelling to avoid the sight of a hospital.
I could not watch hospital documentaries or dramas and hid all
my medical textbooks and journals. I enjoyed sport but began
to avoid exercise, as I was terrified of the sensation of
breathlessness. Even certain inanimate objects filled me with
fear. I still cannot bear a shower curtain to be drawn as it
reminds me of closed hospital curtains and hidden death.
People with PTSD usually recognise all too painfully that there
is something drastically wrong, but are often unable to put a
name to their feelings or symptoms. Worryingly a recent survey
by Combat Stress (a charity working with veterans of the British
armed forces helping to effectively treat and support their
psychological wounds, www.combatstress.org.uk) showed that
fewer than half of general practitioners knew the official
guidelines for diagnosing PTSD as set out by the then National
Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence.
I visited my doctor several times, yet failed to receive a
diagnosis. I was told I was being overly anxious and needed to
relax. Each time I was met with a blank face, I felt increasingly
isolated and lost.
In desperation I researched my symptoms and came across
articles discussing the association between intensive care units
and PTSD. With overwhelming relief I read similar patients’
experiences. I started a lengthy course of private psychotherapy
involving exposure and eye movement desensitisation andreprocessing. I was initially cynical about this method, but it
played a large part in my recovery. Gradually the distressing
memories became less vivid, losing their intensity to become
more organised ordinary memories. The thought of returning
to a hospital environment became less uncomfortable. Using
graded exposure I steadily progressed from nervously sitting in
the hospital coffee shop to comfortably sitting in the intensive
care to which I had been admitted.
Initially I wanted to resign from a career in medicine as I felt I
would never be able to continue in my previous role, and had
lost a lot of trust in the profession. However after four months
of treatment I started to gradually return to work and
successfully resumed full time work eight months after I had
fallen ill. This was a massive step for me. Unfortunately I have
discovered that certain events can still trigger flashbacks and
lead to a depression that totally immobilises me. I am unable
to work around ventilation equipment for long periods. As a
result I cannot complete my paediatric training, although I am
determined to continue my medical career in another specialty.
I know this difficult experience will increase my understanding
and empathy as a practising medical professional. I hope this
article will bring awareness of the prevalence of anxiety,
depression, and PTSD in patients after critical illness.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P038
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Sleep apnoea: from person to patient, and back
again

There was no doubt about the diagnosis. My sudden loud snoring bouts woke up not only my wife but also
me. The bouts were dramatic, like a deep sea diver gasping desperately for air after a world record attempt,
or the roar of a ferocious animal just before the killing attack. Despite having spent eight hours in bed, I was
sometimes exhausted and sweated during the day. Occasionally, I had irresistible urges to sleep at
inconvenient times—when driving or during a dinner with guests, for example. The urge could be so
pronounced that it felt very “painful,” in which cases I had to leave the party to get a nap, with the excuse
that I didn’t feel well. This was certainly true, and it sounded better than to say I was tired.
I finally gave in to the symptoms and visited an ear, nose, and throat specialist, who handed out some
equipment to monitor the sleeping pattern. As expected, the electronic recordings showed apnoea periods,
which lasted up to a minute. The surgeon first suggested removing the uvula and possibly other tissues. This
made me think of Mark Twain, who remarked that to a man with a hammer everything looks like a nail. I
declared that under no circumstances would I accept surgery, which was not only irreversible but could also
be harmful. Furthermore, I told him that there were no data from randomised trials that showed such surgery
worked.1 2 The surgeon then suggested using continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP), which I
accepted, not knowing that its benefits in mild to moderate sleep apnoea are inconclusive.2 He referred me
to a sleep centre, and I asked him to send a copy of his file with the recordings to the centre so that they
would be available when I arrived.
The first thing the sleep specialist wanted to do was to make sleep recordings. It did not seem to matter thatanother specialist had already done them. I protested and told him that new recordings were unnecessary, as
the diagnosis was indisputable. It then turned out that he had not received the recordings, but I insisted he
should request them, rather than subjecting me to a superfluous test.
The missing recordings were not really a problem for the specialist, however. He unpacked a CPAP set and
explained carefully how to use it. He mentioned that I could get a special permit allowing me to carry the
apparatus as hand luggage when I was flying. I explained that I did not intend to carry it with me when
travelling, as I did not feel that sick. I had sometimes cared for patients at an intensive care unit who were
equipped with similar apparatuses, and I did not want to look like a desperately ill patient.
The specialist explained that, to allow people to fall asleep, it took 20 minutes before the apparatus started
working after it was turned on. He also said that if the inhalation pressure was too high I could adjust it, but
he did not tell me how.
Back home, I unpacked the CPAP apparatus with great suspicion, feeling badly about my new role as an
intensive care patient. I usually fall asleep within a minute or two, but now I was wide awake, counting the
minutes till the apparatus started working. When it started, it blew me up like a balloon. It was very
unpleasant and after a while my throat dried out. I consulted the instruction manual, which was about a
hundred pages, but could not find any description of one of the most essential functions, how to reduce the
pressure. I gave up, dismantled the machine, and slept immediately. My wife convinced me to give it another
try the next evening, but the same sequence of events unfolded.
On the third day, I decided to read the instruction manual more carefully and found a page, which,
considering its dire text, curiously was not located at the beginning of the manual. It said that under no
circumstances should one use the apparatus before having read that particular page. Reading on, I
discovered that there was no guarantee that the apparatus would not kill me. I figured out that if it
malfunctioned, I would reuse my own breath and die peacefully without triggering any alarm bells and
without any intensive care nurses rushing to my rescue. Startled by this, I searched PubMed and the internet
but found no data on the risk of this lethal complication.
I decided that the inconvenience of my condition did not justify any risk of dying because of the treatment. I
had consulted the medical literature before I saw the surgeon and knew that observational studies indicated
that sleep apnoea increases the risk of cardiac disease. But so many things in life increase that risk, and
observational studies can be misleading. Prolonged oxygen deficiency may not be good for the heart, but I
have no risk factors for heart disease and do a lot of sports. Thus these observations didn’t count in my
private decision analysis.
At the next visit to the sleep centre, the specialist asked me how it went. I told him about my experience and
deliberations and returned the equipment. To my surprise, he told me that since my sleep apnoea was mild,
he would not have recommended the apparatus in the first place. He had now received the recordings from
the surgeon, and again to my surprise, he seemed to base his judgments on “laboratory values” rather than
on the patient’s symptoms. He also said that CPAP was considered to work only at certain ages and was not
recommended after age 70. I replied that, approaching 60, I saw no reason to use this terrible, “patientising”
apparatus, which might even kill me, in this little time window.
I told my story to two colleagues and one of them remarked that most patients cannot tolerate using CPAP
for sleep apnoea. He sent me a paper that had found that only two of 35 patients used CPAP for seven hours
for at least 70% of the nights.3 It would have been nice to know this beforehand, as I would then not have
felt so awkward when I tried to use what I felt was like firing at sparrows with a cannon, as my problems were
not life threatening. If I had also known about the BMJ review that questioned the effect of CPAP in mild to
moderate sleep apnoea I would not have consulted a doctor in the first place.2
My short guest visit as a patient was alarming. Worst of all, I had lost my autonomy when having
appointments with doctors who told me what to do, and became a patient who other people might pity. I do
not want any of that. I dropped the patient role, as I am not patient enough to consult doctors unless I am
really ill.
A case always has three sides: yours, mine, and the correct one. My two doctors were pleasant and skilled
colleagues. If this account has been unfair to them in any way, or inaccurate, I apologise. But what I have
described is what I felt. And I believe we can learn a lot from patients’ narratives.4 What strikes me most
from my own “patient visit” is that it is grossly unfair that a doctor like me, who does research and is used to
searching for the best available evidence, is privileged in comparison to the vast majority of patients who
cannot do this and therefore hope—and usually also think—that the doctor knows best. That is not always
the case.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P039
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Kallmann syndrome

My early childhood was fairly uneventful medically apart from
70% hearing loss in one ear and no sense of smell. I reached
what I now know to be the normal pre-puberty Tanner stages,
and up to the age of 12 years nothing seemed to be amiss. Going
through my early teenage years it was a case of waking up each
day and hoping something was going to start to develop. I knew
it was getting late to start puberty, but I assumed it would all
start soon enough. Eventually I was the only one in my year
group not to show any development, and this was certainly
noticed by the rest of the year group.
A routine health inspection by the school nurse as part of the
health screen for a permit to work on a newspaper delivery
round led to a referral to a general practitioner at the age of 15
years. At that stage the GP said I was just late starting, that I
should wait and see, and I was sent on my way.
Up to the age of 14, I was a normal enough schoolboy I think.
I was in the Scouts and was involved in my local cricket club.
I gradually got left out of social events as I lacked the confidence
to go and had no sexual drive at all. I knew the basics from a
purely physical point of view but had no libido or interest in
any sort of teenage activities. I made up excuses not to go to
social events, and eventually I stopped being invited.
By the age of 17, it was clear that nothing was starting so I was
referred by my GP to my local general hospital, first to a general
medicine consultant and then to a urologist. I was put on low
dose injectable testosterone (Sustanon) monthly but not offered
any follow-up assessment; it was just assumed everything would
all start naturally.
By the time I went to university, something was obviously
wrong, but I did not have the drive to do anything about it. I
even stopped taking the Sustanon for a time as it seemed to be
having no effect on me apart from a slight growth spurt. Looking
back now, there were opportunities for me at university, but,
without the drive and the knowledge of the condition, I did not
have the interest or confidence to notice them, let alone follow
them up.
The first time I saw an endocrinologist was when I started my
first job, as a biomedical scientist at the Royal Free Hospital in
London. I had studied endocrinology and haematology as part
of my biomedical science degree and had a bit of an
understanding on how puberty was supposed to work. Choosing
the endocrinology pathway for my biomedical science degree
was partly driven by the wish to know more about my own
situation. When I started work at the Royal Free I was
determined to talk to an endocrinologist even though my GP
still had not referred me. Under my own volition, I contacted
Richard Quinton, at the time a senior registrar in endocrinology
under Pierre-Marc Bouloux. One of the first questions he asked
was, “Do you have a sense of smell?” It was the first time any
doctor had asked me that question. It was also the first time any
doctor had mentioned Kallmann syndrome to me.
The correct diagnosis soon followed, and I was prescribed a
suitable dose of testosterone, first in the form of Testogel and
then later Nebido. The delay in suitable treatment from the age
of 16 to 22 meant I went six years with a very low testosterone
level, with the subsequent delay in secondary sexual
development and bone strength.
Blood tests confirmed the low levels of follicle stimulating
hormone (FSH) and luteinising hormone (LH) that, combined
with the anosmia, confirmed the diagnosis. Magnetic resonance
imaging showed the absence of the olfactory bulbs, and a bone
density (DEXA) scan showed osteopenia. At the time of
diagnosis, I probably looked 10 years younger than I was and
had never shaved.On a physical level the late diagnosis has left me with
osteopenia, which is still present but at least not deteriorating.
Recently, I have also been found to have severe vitamin D
deficiency, which is probably contributing to the osteopenia,
for which I am prescribed a 1000 IU vitamin D supplement.
The lack of gonadotrophins and hence androgens in my teenage
years also resulted in a delay in the development of secondary
sexual characteristics. The lack of testicular development will
always be present. The relative lack of penile growth remains
a constant frustration. There will always be the question of what
would have happened if testosterone treatment had been started
earlier and at the physiologically correct dose.
I did achieve a certain amount of testicular development and
limited sperm development while on a gonadotrophin clinical
trial. This lasted for only as long as the trial lasted, but it does
give me hope for future fertility, and the increase in testicular
size did bring a certain degree of reassurance and better self
confidence.
It is on the psychological level that my delayed diagnosis has
had the biggest impact in my view. Judging by my own
experiences and those of fellow patients I have met and talked
to, this is an area that is often overlooked.
With puberty and adolescence being so closely linked, if a
patient does not enter puberty at almost the same stage as his
peer group, he risks being left behind socially and emotionally,
as well as physically. I feel that this emotional development of
social interaction is difficult to catch up on and is often a result
of feeling socially isolated when puberty fails to start.
I have not married, never had any serious girlfriends, and have
very limited sexual experience. I think this is a direct result of
my lack of emotional and physical development while a teenager
and young adult. Although a lot of fellow patients I talk to do
get married and have relationships, my experiences are by no
means unique. I think early diagnosis plays a key part in being
able to build the confidence to develop relationships, and the
later you start the harder it is to catch up. From my experience
with fellow patients, it is those who are diagnosed and treated
early who cope with the condition better. For many, the very
fact they can put a name to the condition and realise that they
are not the only person in the world not going through puberty
is a big step in being able to cope with the condition.Once I was diagnosed the variation in possible testosterone
treatments available became apparent, as did possible fertility
treatments. Up to the point of diagnosis, I was not taking the
most appropriate dose of testosterone, which affected my energy
levels and sex drive. There are several different forms of
testosterone replacement methods, which suit different people
at different times. Since being diagnosed, I have tried a few,
including the gonadotrophin injections, which I found to be
particularly beneficial to me as they induce a certain level of
fertility and allow for limited testicular growth.
The most important treatment is possibly the diagnosis itself.
Being labelled as a “late starter” or “late bloomer” when in your
early 20s can be very humiliating. The ability to put a label to
your condition and the knowledge that it is a recognised
condition are the first steps in coming to terms with a condition
that is difficult to describe to others. The use of patient support
groups on Yahoo and Facebook also play a big part in being
able to talk about the condition, but this is possible only once
the correct diagnosis has been made.
The patient is happy to be contacted by any patient with Kallmann
syndrome wishing to talk to another patient (email:
neilsmith38@hotmail.com).
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P040
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Intensive care

I am a 27 year old French woman and have lived in 
London since 2002. I came here to learn English, to 
meet people from other countries and to work. I had 
never been ill in my life, never been allergic to anything, and had no worries about my health.
In February 2003, on holiday in France, I had severe 
diarrhoea. After a few days, I was admitted to hospital 
with peritonitis. A few weeks later I was diagnosed with 
Crohn’s disease. It changed my life completely. I spent 
three months in hospital before returning to England, 
where my husband was waiting for me.
As I learnt about my new life and new diet, I also 
started to become an old lady in my body. I developed 
a lot of joint pain from arthritis. At the end of October, 
back in France, my gastroenterologist prescribed sulfasalazine for my pain. The treatment went well for two 
weeks and I returned to London, but then I began to 
feel really sick. I had a high fever, pain everywhere in 
my body and I vomited everything I ate. I had shivers, 
could not sleep, and collapsed repeatedly.
On 20 November, we called an ambulance, but they 
said it was probably flu and that I should see my general practitioner, who prescribed paracetamol. Within 
two days, I was very ill; my skin had become very red 
and I was collapsing more frequently.
At the St Charles Hospital in London, the doctor gave 
me penicillin, believing I had meningitis. I was sent to 
St Mary’s Hospital, where I saw several doctors, who 
thought my illness could be a bladder problem related 
to Crohn’s disease. I had several CT scans and was 
told I was a “very interesting case.” Nobody wonderedabout the fact that I had a rash. I began to feel better; 
the rash disappeared and I wanted to go home.
I was discharged on 28 November, with a check-up 
appointment for the following Monday. I started my 
treatment again. On the Monday, my skin was very 
itchy and red. I told the doctor, who gave me anti-itch 
pills and I had some blood tests done.
That night the fever returned. I felt terribly tired and 
had no appetite. I was supposed to see my general practitioner on the Tuesday afternoon but was far too tired 
and sick. I called my husband and told him I needed 
to go to hospital.
When I arrived I began to feel really unwell and 
very hot; I collapsed in front of the lift. A doctor who 
saw me put me straight in a wheelchair and sent me 
to the accident and emergency department, where I 
was admitted. During the night I collapsed again and 
vomited a lot. I had a fever, and the on-call doctor 
became very worried.
The next morning the consultant arrived but really 
did not know what to do; the medical team still believed 
my illness had something to do with my Crohn’s disease 
and I was scheduled for surgery the next morning.
My fingers started to swell, and the nurse had to 
cut one of my rings. Even at this point, we did not ask 
ourselves why I was swelling up. That night, the nurse 
needed to take some blood and tried to find a vein. 
Desperately she tried and tried again but with no success. I began to lose consciousness.
At this point I became really spaced out. I knew I 
had been moved to intensive care and that there were 
people talking to me, but I didn’t care; my mind was 
somewhere else. The nurse told me I had to be brave 
as they were going to put some lines between my legs. 
I didn’t care—I was so sick, they could do anything they 
wanted. I didn’t feel the pain, I was in another world. I 
could hear and see people, but my mind was not there. 
On Thursday, I went for surgery.
After surgery, my skin blew up and burned. I was 
slipping into a coma, unaware of everything around me. 
I was put onto a life support machine and transferred to 
the intensive care unit in St Thomas’ Hospital.
During my coma I dreamed a lot. Strangely, I was 
always in a hospital bed during my dreams. I remember my father speaking to me, saying my mother and 
my family were there. My husband was my guide, 
speaking to me by telepathy. It was never scary, but 
I know I prayed a lot, asking the Lord to help me. It’s 
funny because I dreamed of doctors and nurses who 
were good or bad during my coma; when I woke up, 
there they were, for real.
I have no clear memory of my first awakening. It wasall very confusing, and I think the drugs were mixing 
reality and dreams. I had a chest infection and remember the physiotherapist coming and making me cough 
really hard. It’s one of the most difficult things I have 
done, it was so exhausting.
After 24 hours, they put me back to sleep. I was still 
not aware of what had happened or of the gravity of 
the situation. I don’t remember my second awakening 
clearly either. I was being ventilated. The staff were 
extremely kind and reassuring. I was aware that something had happened, that I was big and couldn’t speak, 
but it didn’t bother me. My lips were burning and I 
couldn’t move a finger. My only requests were for a 
pencil and paper and for a clock to track time.
My mother and my husband came every day and 
talked to me. I knew it was close to Christmas; the radio 
was on, and all the Christmas songs are now buried in 
my head.
On Saturday 20 December, the doctors planned to 
take me off the breathing machine. I was petrified. I kept 
asking the nurse, by writing, if it would be safe, and if 
she could check with the doctors. That afternoon they 
took the big step. The ventilation was removed and I 
was breathing on my own. My voice was very thin.
The following Monday, I was moved back to St 
Mary’s Hospital. I was very excited but still did not 
realise what had happened. All I knew was that I was 
big and had had surgery. The ambulance came in the 
evening and the crew were so nice. We passed Big Ben 
and the Houses of Parliament, and they gave me a little 
sightseeing tour.
Back in St Mary’s, I met my dermatologist. She was 
so kind and told me that everything would be OK. 
I started to become really thin and lose all my fluid. 
I couldn’t sleep. Every time I went to sleep I woke 
up again, brutally. I had terrible diarrhoea and was 
unable to control myself. I was so weak I couldn’t 
move. I was totally dependent on the medical staff 
and my family. I was terrified I was going to have a 
breakdown.
My husband brought me a small television, which 
was amazing. I began to rediscover the world.
On 24 December, my dermatologist explained to me 
what had happened (see the doctor’s perspective box 
for her explanation). I felt really lucky and grateful. I 
asked the doctors when I would be able to go home 
and they said, when I could walk on my own and if I 
had some help at home. I was determined to go back to 
my place as soon as possible, to begin my own battle, 
the one with my body. The physiotherapist showed me 
some easy exercises to start my muscles functioning 
again. It was hard work; I felt as if all my physical and 
mental energy had been taken away.
Eventually, on 16 January, I was allowed home under 
supervision. I was so happy and proud of myself. I 
weighed 40 kg, was very weak, but was standing. This 
was my victory.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P042
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Neuromuscular degeneration

My partner, Mustafa, a long term smoker, underwent a single
vessel angioplasty after an angina attack in September 2005,
aged 55. He immediately stopped smoking and, on his doctor’s
advice, joined a three month rehabilitation exercise class and
began taking statins (40 mg simvastatin to start with, replaced
by 40 mg atorvastatin within two months). He continued to eat
a healthy Mediterranean diet and take regular exercise (he was
a semi-professional dancer in his youth and, having sold his
business earlier in 2005 and taken early retirement, now enjoyed
long walks exploring London with a friend). Although he had
been a moderate drinker, in response to his health scare he cut
down on alcohol. He was now free of angina, active, and
positive, and said that he had never felt better.The first indications that all was not well came in spring 2006,
when Mustafa started complaining of muscle cramps, especially
at night, in his calves and thighs, usually after a long walk. By
early 2007, he found it an effort to keep his arms aloft to wash
his hair in the shower or to walk up even mild slopes. Sitting
became uncomfortable, his neck and shoulders ached, and he
experienced pain after mild exercise or even just standing for
fairly short periods. He started to age visibly: his limbs lost
muscle tone, his hair fell out, and he began to look permanently
anxious as his confidence eroded. He had been proud of his
looks and always dressed well, but now his clothes no longer
fitted him and he had little spare energy to expend on his
appearance.
He made several visits to his general practitioner over this
period, and in August 2007 the statin dose was halved at his
request. By October, his serum cholesterol level had risen to
5.4 mmol/L, but, despite the lower statin dose, his creatine
kinase level continued to rise and was now at 312 units/L.He became depressed about his permanent tiredness and
weakness, and obsessed with finding out what was wrong with
him, spending most days reading medical reference books. This
fixation developed into a loss of trust with all but a few members
of the medical profession with whom he came into contact
during his illness. He felt that nobody was listening to him and
that any discussion he wished to have about the documented
side effects of statins and how they might be affecting him was
met with a wall of silence. Two memorable remarks that
contributed to his frustration were, “If you don’t take the statins,
you will die” (his GP) and “Ah, you’re on statins, you will live
forever” (a hepatologist).
In April 2008 Mustafa decided to stop taking statins without
telling his doctor. By late May, his symptoms had improved
dramatically. He was able to walk long distances and up steep
hills again, even in hot weather on a holiday in Turkey. The fact
that his joie de vivre was returning was a huge boost for me
too—it seemed that we could get our life back together again
now that he was starting to have the energy to do the things he
used to enjoy.
At a check-up some time around the end of June, when his
cholesterol level was found to have risen, he admitted that he
had stopped taking statins. His GP strongly advised him to go
back on them, and within a short time he was complaining of
breathlessness, weakness, and backache. His GP switched him
to ezetimibe (10 mg), and within 10 days he was complaining
of back and leg pain and a hoarse voice. His health continued
to deteriorate, and by early November his voice was weak, he
was fatigued all the time, and on one memorable night had to
get up seven times to urinate. He developed a suffocating
sensation when lying down, and his urine became brown and
cloudy, but he was told that a urine test showed nothing
abnormal. However, in late November his GP told him to stop
taking ezetimibe immediately: we later discovered that his
creatine kinase level had reached 783 units/L at that point.
Despite stopping all cholesterol lowering drugs, he continued
to decline. By early 2009, his appetite had reduced, he had
worsening muscle wasting, weakness, and twitching, especially
at night, and in February was admitted to hospital. His emotional
state at this time was poor; he was convinced he was going to
die. While in hospital, he was seen by a neurologist whose notes
state that there was “muscle twitching in thighs, which are rather
coarse for true fasiculations” and who diagnosed statin induced
myopathy. After a week, he was discharged from hospital
without any real knowledge of what was likely to happen to
him.
As the year progressed, he developed an itchy rash on the back
of his legs, a dry mouth, mouth ulcers, and was often cold
(particularly his legs, feet, and right shoulder), especially at
night. He had vivid dreams, which he would act out; he was too
weak to cough and could sleep only on one side, otherwise he
couldn’t breathe. During June, he had increased difficulty
breathing and insisted on sitting in a chair all night, as he felt
he would stop breathing if he went to sleep lying down. His
posture was poor, and his neck became very weak. Eventually
his head twisted round to the left, and his right shoulder was
permanently raised. Several tests confirmed progressive
weakness of his proximal muscles but normal strength in his
limbs.
He had an appointment with a neurologist, who agreed with the
statin related diagnosis and recommended a muscle biopsy if
there was no improvement in his condition over the next three
months. As his condition swiftly worsened, we got an emergency
appointment at the same hospital, where he saw a different
neurologist, who diagnosed, with little preamble and with nine
people in the room, motor neurone disease. This came as a shock
to us both and a huge blow to his already fragile mental state.
Despite this diagnosis, he had no muscle stiffness, no difficulty
swallowing, and he never once fell. His fine dexterity was good:
he was able to dress and feed himself until a few days before
he died, only eventually needing help with these tasks because
he was too weak to manage on his own. Two weeks before he
died he threaded a needle, changed a fuse in a plug using a
screwdriver, and fastened a small fiddly necklace clasp for me.
I encouraged him to do as many of these tasks as possible in an
effort to contradict a diagnosis that he found too awful to
contemplate.
He died in hospital on 22 August 2009 of type 2 respiratory
failure (oxygen level 50% on admission to the emergency
department) and two heart attacks over the course of three days.During the last six months of his life, Mustafa came under the
care of a different GP at the same practice. Dr Freris was kind
and sympathetic and made appointments for him at times when
I could be present too. She listened to his fears and concurred
with his view that, whatever the final diagnosis, statins had had
a serious effect on his health. Although it was clear to us all that
he was beyond help, Mustafa always came away from those
appointments feeling that he had found a doctor who understood
what he was going through.
Many of the symptoms displayed during the course of Mustafa’s
illness—symptoms that eventually led to a diagnosis of motor
neurone disease—are well documented side effects of statins
and are listed in the leaflet that accompanies the tablets. With
such similarities in mind, it seems wise to monitor
statin-intolerant patients closely and to weigh up carefully
whether the disadvantages of taking these drugs outweigh the
benefits for these patients.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P043
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Lessons from patients’ journeys
Over the past seven or eight years, I have been helping patients
to get their stories published, obtaining doctors’ perspectives
on them, and, with colleagues, developing the guidelines for
drafting patients’ journeys, hoping that these might increase the
usefulness of such articles to doctors (box).
I describe here some of the wide range of lessons that have
emerged from the patients’ journeys that we have published.
We have repeatedly learnt that although doctors are comfortable
with uncertainty, patients are far less so. They want prompt and
accurate diagnoses, taking the view that a condition cannot be
treated effectively if the doctor doesn’t know what it is. And
they need a label to explain their conditions to family and
friends. Of the numerous examples of this, one of the more
recent was an account of trachea-oesophageal atresia.1
Although medicine is a constantly evolving discipline, many
patients fail to recognise that doctors don’t have a solution for
every problem. Patients also tend to regard their conditions as
unique, as if their doctor doesn’t see dozens of patients with
similar problems each week. Doctors may easily dismiss
apparently common conditions, and this is demoralising for
patients and potentially dangerous—dismissiveness can lead to
misdiagnosis, or a missed diagnosis, of a serious condition.
Some patients may be as responsible as doctors for delayed
diagnoses, often because the condition “creeps up on them,”
becoming gradually worse. By the time they seek medical advice
the disease may be far advanced—and possibly terminal.
Quite often, too, patients are either embarrassed by their
symptoms or reluctant to “waste the doctor’s time.” Doctors
see embarrassing conditions all the time, but their patients do
not, and doctors need to be sensitive to their feelings.2 Similarly,
it doesn’t usually help patients to be told that their problems are
trivial or routine: they will have consulted a doctor because they
are concerned. They need their worries allayed, not dismissed.
Doctors too can be responsible for delays, taking too long to
correctly diagnose a condition. Attachment to a “working
diagnosis” long after the appearance of new signs and symptoms
is a particular trap, as the general practitioner who was managing
a case of ovarian cancer as irritable bowel syndrome admitted.3
One of the most important lessons from the series has been the
importance of considering apparently unlikely diagnoses as well
as the most obvious ones, a lesson eloquently expressed in “Sir
Karl Popper, swans, and the general practitioner.”4 Perhaps the
least forgivable delay occurred in a case of Klinefelter’s
syndrome: the condition was correctly diagnosed when the
patient was 14 years old but the diagnosis was then “lost” and
he went untreated for 46 years until the condition was correctly
diagnosed again.5
More worrying, though, are cases of rare conditions, where
uncertainty should have led to early referral for a specialist
opinion. That is one reason why rare conditions feature more
often in the Patient’s Journey series than in the rest of the
Practice section of the BMJ: we hope that these articles may
trigger recollection when, very occasionally, a patient presents
with one. The case of xeroderma pigmentosum described in
Alex Webb’s account6 would have not have taken so long to
diagnose if his doctors had taken the message of Karl Popper’s
swans to heart.
Every patient’s journey explains the consequences for the
patient, their family and friends, and their relationships with
their health professionals.
Unsurprisingly, several of them have been gruelling—to me as
a layman, at least. The account of the mesothelioma from which
the author was to die was particularly so,7
as was the account
of obstetric fistula, which occurs mostly in developing countries
and usually leads to women being disowned by their husbands
and families and left to beg in the street.8
Almost as saddening have been the accounts of the burdens
placed on carers by chronic, terminal conditions, vividly
demonstrated in husbands’ accounts of the deaths of their wives
from motor neurone disease9
and dementia.10
Doctors mostly see patients for only a few minutes occasionally
and focus during that time on the illness itself, so it’s easy for
them to forget about the effects that the illness is having on the
patient’s everyday life. Indeed, rarely does a doctor know what
a patient does on leaving the surgery, the things that interest
and preoccupy them, their needs and aspirations, and their
capabilities and limitations. Key to the successful treatment of
a condition—or of multiple conditions—is to “see the person
in the patient.”11
Another lesson to have emerged from the articles is how modest
adjustments could vastly improve patients’ experience of
treatment. Irritating difficulties abound: with travel; long waits
for appointments in both primary and secondary care; long waits
between follow-up appointments. These last two, in particular,
tie in with the observation that doctors know little about how
patients behave when away from their surgeries. They also fuel
the public perception that the health service is oblivious to the
fact that patients have their own lives to lead.This is one of the aspects that causes us a fair amount of soul
searching. We don’t see Patient’s Journey articles as a means
of providing opportunities for doctors to promote new treatments
for which there is little or no evidence base for efficacy and
safety. Some submissions have been attempts to “drum up
business” for a new intervention. If a treatment is believed to
work in a particular condition, the BMJ would need a proper
study to provide robust evidence of that. A promising result in
a single patient is scarcely admissible as evidence.
Some of the “underused” interventions are organisational, rather
than clinical, an excellent example being seen in an account of
a patient’s two hip replacements at the same hospital,12 12 years
apart, during which time postoperative treatment had been
greatly improved by the development of a team based approach.
Another underused intervention involves the benefits of
continuity of care and the development of good working
relationships between patients and health professionals,
demonstrated clearly in the patient’s journey about psoriasis.13
Underused interventions include such life enhancing resources
as skin camouflage, shown vividly in the patient’s journey about
facial disfigurement.14 And the catalogue of aids to mobility and
daily living given in one patient’s account of his road to recovery
from spinal cord injury15 should serve to remind doctors of
resources they either knew nothing of or about which they may
have forgotten.
One lesson that shines through almost all the patients’ journeys
is the admiration and respect that patients have for clinicians.
This is not because they know that their treating physicians will
be invited to write about their cases; it is genuine and honest
and reinforces the findings of surveys that have shown
repeatedly that the great majority of patients who have used the
NHS recently think it is excellent.
From a more personal point of view, as a non-doctor, I have
been greatly surprised by the sheer number of medical conditions
and interventions of which clinicians need to have at least some
understanding. Even though we have published about 100
patients’ journeys so far, we receive a constant stream of new
offerings, usually instigated by doctors. Indeed, we currently
have more than 10 articles accepted and awaiting publication
and many more in the pipeline.
When the series began in 2006, the articles were written solely
by patients and tended to be better suited to the colour
supplements of Sunday papers than to the BMJ, the role of which
is to help doctors make better decisions. Recognising this, we
introduced the “doctors’ perspectives” boxes, usually written
by the patients’ own treating physicians, giving a brief overview
of the condition or intervention, saying what he or she learnt
from this particular case and suggesting lessons the BMJ’s
readers might take from it. That seems to have worked well. It
should come as no surprise, though, that the best patients’
journeys are those written by doctors who have themselves been
patients. They know what they have and have not been taught
and can see the lessons for doctors in the stories they have to
tell; lay patients are rarely so well informed.
I have been impressed, too, by doctors’ willingness to learn
from patients’ stories. Where things have gone wrong, doctors
have almost always said so. Perhaps the most dramatic examples
are a patient’s account of ovarian cancer,3 which led to an
in-practice review (in which she was included) and to a general
practitioner’s suggestion that she write the case up for the
Patient’s Journey series; and a woman’s gruelling account of
being conscious but paralysed through an emergency caesarean
section16; she and her anaesthetist have since discussed in detail
what happened and become friends.
In a few cases, the patients’ doctors have sought to correct what
they regard as inaccuracies in patients’ stories, rather than
exploring the misunderstandings. Far better to leave the
inaccuracy in and say in the doctor’s perspective box, “Is that
what the patient thought I meant? I wonder why.”
Reassuringly few healthcare units have reacted badly to what’s
been written about them, instead trying to resolve the patient’s
concerns. It points up one of the biggest lessons of all: that
doctors and patients can view aspects of the same “treatment”
very differently. There is no privileged vantage point from which
to decide who is right and who is wrong. This leads us to what
may be the most significant lesson of all, the importance of
good doctor-patient communication, which needs to be asjargon-free as possible, be empathetic, and bridge educational,
social, and age related boundaries. It is good that British medical
schools now place so much emphasis on this.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P044
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Two hip replacements

In 2009 I had a left hip replacement, having had a new right hip in 1997. Both operations took place in the
same hospital and were carried out by different surgeons, and both have been very successful.
I have nothing but praise for the surgeons and staff who cared for me on both occasions. However, the 12
years between the operations saw substantial improvements in surgical techniques and postoperative case
management, making the second operation a much more pleasant experience. This was partly because the
orthopaedic technique had been improved and refined and is now less invasive and so reduces damage to
the surrounding muscles. After the first operation it was more than a week before I could raise the operated
leg from the bed, whereas in 2009 I could do so on the same day as the operation. For the second operation
I had a spinal anaesthetic, which made the immediate pain control and recovery much better.
However, the most important difference was that in 2009 the preparation and recovery of hip replacement
patients were in the hands of a multidisciplinary team of specialist orthopaedic nurses, physiotherapists, and
occupational therapists, rather than only in the hands of the surgeon. Specialist orthopaedic nurses had
initiated the team approach, and the consultant surgeons had agreed to such delegation and compromised
on a uniform policy of postoperative management. The team members shared their different expertise to
achieve a united aim of quality of care and rapid recovery for patients.After the first consultation with the surgeon I attended a “hip school” with several other patients. It lastedabout an hour, and one of the hip team members explained what to expect when coming in to hospital. We
were shown x ray films of damaged hips and were able to handle examples of the different types of hip
prosthesis. We were each measured for crutches and a stick and shown how to use them. We were able to
borrow the crutches and sticks from the hospital, returning them postoperatively when the team deemed
they were no longer needed. They also lent each of us a DVD demonstrating advised exercises for before
and after the operation. The same information was provided in booklet form, along with an invaluable list of
“dos” and “don’ts” for after the operation. My fellow patients and I found the knowledge offered by the hip
school empowering. It raised our morale and confidence and increased our determination to cooperate with
each other and with the team.After the operation we were all treated in the same way by the hip team, with confidence, encouragement,
and infectious enthusiasm. The different consultants’ consistency in management and treatment meant that
the patients did not make comparisons or feel that their treatment had been poorer than that of other
patients. Every patient was encouraged to become mobile immediately. If all went well, as it did in my case,
we were ready to go home in two to three days, able to walk safely with crutches, manage stairs, and get into
a car. We could contact the hip team by phone if we had any problems—it is usually impossible to talk to the
surgeon, unless you are a private patient. Knowing that I could phone someone who knew me and my
progress in hospital was important to me. I developed an unexpected symptom from my new hip, but this
was recognised by the physiotherapist I spoke to, and I was reassured and advised which exercises to
concentrate on.
After two weeks and again at six weeks postoperatively, each patient was seen in the hip clinic by the team.
All team members were able to assess the recovery process. They emphasised the importance of various
exercises to strengthen the appropriate muscles and increase joint stability, and advised avoidance of certain
positions and movements to prevent loosening or dislocation of the new hip. I found this very helpful. It
increased my confidence and encouraged me to persevere with boring exercises to improve my rate of
recovery.
In comparison with the ease of this rapid recovery programme, memories of my first hip replacement were of
immobility and pain. I stayed in bed for three days, initially with an indwelling catheter, using patient
controlled analgesics intravenously, and went home after a week. The immobile operated leg caused painful
heels and miserable nights. When a nurse unexpectedly got me out of bed to stand, to my surprise this
caused me great anxiety and distress. This, together with my difficulty in negotiating crutches, left me feeling
utterly humiliated.
The multidisciplinary team approach undoubtedly brings great benefit to patients, to the atmosphere on the
ward, and to the working satisfaction of the team members. By specialising in joint replacement recovery,
they gain considerable personal experience, provide continuity of care, and give authoritative advice. For
surgeons to agree to a uniform policy and to allow the follow-up care of their patients to be delegated to the
hip team calls for both courage and generosity. It was quite obvious to me as a patient that this is an
effective way of working, satisfying to staff, and highly beneficial to patients. I wonder why this method of
postoperative case management is not used by all orthopaedic units, and the development of similar
systems might be possible for other procedures too.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P045
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Through and beyond anaesthesia awareness

On the morning of 2 January 2004, I gave birth to my second son when I was less than 26 weeks pregnant.
The delivery was by emergency caesarean because the umbilical cord had prolapsed, cutting off the blood
and oxygen supply to my tiny baby. It was a shock to realise that my son was in grave danger, but I was very
thankful to the healthcare staff for responding immediately and doing their utmost to save his life.
Because of the acuteness of the situation, the caesarean was to be carried out under general anaesthesia.
Frankly, this was a relief—I was terrified my son might already have died and, therefore, preferred not to
witness him being delivered. I had been under general anaesthesia before without any problems and was not
too anxious about going through it again.Unfortunately, something went terribly wrong. The drug that should have put me to sleep worked only
partially, but nobody registered this. Instead, the anaesthetists proceeded to give me a muscle relaxant. I was
partly drugged, which made me forget the context: that I was giving birth through a caesarean. Otherwise,
however, I was wide awake, with no soothing effect of painkillers. I experienced how my muscles twitched
then became totally paralysed so I could not breathe, and how a flat metal blade that felt like a knife was put
into my mouth and jammed down my throat, followed by a thick wire-like thing that I thought further
obstructed my breathing. I then felt an arm being thrust into my vagina (this was to keep my child from
advancing into the pelvis, but felt as if I was being raped) and the cool feeling of liquid on my tummy,followed by agony when the obstetrician cut my abdomen open. Because I had forgotten about the
caesarean, I thought that I was being raped, strangled, and cut up by some evil force. For a few seconds, I
would black out in terror, then wake up again, only to realise that I was dying and unable to fight for my life.
After a few minutes my son was delivered, which was when I received a large dose of opioids and finally
drifted away, not realising that I had just become a mother for the second time.When I woke after the anaesthesia to learn that my child weighed only 751 g but had survived, I remembered
none of the dramatic events surrounding his birth; I was in control and acted rationally. The next few days,
however, I reacted very strongly. I cried and was terribly frightened without understanding why. Everybody,
including my husband and myself, believed that it was because I was afraid my son would die, which made
perfect sense because he was seriously ill. When his condition ultimately improved and he was discharged to
go home, my symptoms failed to cease.
During the first few months after his birth, the recollection of how my son was delivered slowly re-emerged as
nightmares and uncontrollable flashbacks. I would wake in the middle of the night scared to death about
choking, with the memory of a sharp, shiny metal thing being thrust into my throat without me being able to
lift a finger to defend myself, or with a strong impulse to vomit or an urge to pee, without any physical cause.
To start with, I refused to relate my nightmares to the anaesthesia—they were too horrifyingly brutal to be
true. I finally told first my husband (more than six months later, when my son had stabilised), then my general
practitioner about the nightmares. They suggested that there might be a link with the anaesthesia, so I
contacted the hospital where my son was born to arrange a meeting with the anaesthetist who had taken
care of the anaesthetic on that morning.Meeting the anaesthetist was a scary experience because the anaesthetic drugs had made me lose the
context of what was happening. Emotionally, the person I was meeting represented those people who had
conspired to rape, strangle, and kill me that morning, and I had spent some time before the meeting being
very angry and wishing to avenge what had happened to me. My husband commented that my experience
must be similar to that of a torture victim, and that being horrified was a very understandable reaction.
Nonetheless, I shook with fear when I finally sat opposite the doctor who had anaesthetised me. At the same
time, my rational self realised that she had not intentionally hurt me, and that I needed her help to understand
what had happened.
During the following six months, I met with the anaesthetist on a regular basis, underwent therapy from a
psychologist, and addressed my emotions from the awareness experience. The anaesthetist explained how
my nightmares were related to the events that had taken place when I was anaesthetised and underwent
surgery. Understanding what had happened helped me a lot, and I slowly learnt not to be afraid of the
anaesthetist. She taught me how to intubate a resuscitation manikin, which helped me work through my own
memories of being paralysed and intubated. After half a year of therapy, I voluntarily entered the operating
theatre again, lay on the operating table, and let the anaesthetist stand behind me and hold my head. That
was a proud and exhilarating moment.
The anaesthetist had also been affected by my awareness experience, but our meetings helped us both to
get over the event. I know that several of her colleagues advised her to stop seeing me, but she continued
even though it was tough for her. In some ways, my role in our mutual experience was less complicated than
hers—I was the injured party, which earned me sympathy and support from people around me, whereas she
was the one who was responsible for my suffering, even though it had been impossible to detect during the
anaesthesia.I have learnt a lot from my awareness experience. First of all, I have learnt how strong you can be when you
have something very important to fight for. During the first months after my son’s birth, I had my premature
baby to fight for, and I did that very well. I also learnt that it is important to ask for help if you cannot handle a
problem yourself, and I’ve learnt about trusting somebody again and forgiveness. I am less afraid to die
because I believe that dying will be a lot less painful and terrifying than being killed slowly on an operating
table. I am also now open to the possibility that a person might need to die simply because they are suffering
so much that life becomes worthless.
The anaesthetist and I have become friends, and we still see each other six years after I thought that she was
going to kill me. Today, I would trust her with my life without hesitation. I consider myself 95% cured from the
severe post-traumatic stress disorder I experienced. I have returned to work as a psychologist and am doing
well. I have written a book about having a premature baby, published a few months ago, that includes a
description of the awareness experience. It helped me a lot to write it all down. My husband and friends think
I have changed, mostly in a positive direction. I personally feel that I have grown less able to sense my
emotions; fortunately, I strongly sense my love for my family and my gratitude to all those who helped me
heal.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P046
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Friedreich ataxia

I have had to struggle with a disability and consequent
socioeconomic obstacles since a teenager. I was 14 years old
when I was diagnosed with Friedreich ataxia, a progressive
disease causing impairment to the nerves and so a failure of
timely muscle reactions throughout my body. My only apparent
initial physical abnormalities were the appearance and
uncoordinated gait of someone under the influence of alcohol,
but I quickly became expert at hiding such frailties. For whatever
reason, I was never without friends, and was never, to my
knowledge, made fun of by school friends and peers.
When I was 18, my mother died of cancer. This was an
emotional time, and my disease temporarily took control of me,
leading to a physical and emotional downward spiral.
Fortunately, the closeness of family and friends helped ease the
pain. They helped me attain some form of self esteem, and to
maintain pride in my life. At 18 I was free and able to seek
activities and forms of stimulation that were outside the regular
happenings of adolescence. I succumbed to the lure of city based
discothèques, where not everybody appreciated my uniquely
uncoordinated style of dancing. I was an easy target for bullies,
and on a couple of occasions this developed into trouble.
Muscular growth was hampered, giving rise to severe
deformities, limitations, and other problems. For example, I
have had to deal with severe scoliosis and cardiomyopathy. By
23, I was reliant on a wheelchair, but now I’m simply too
uncoordinated to make use of an electric one. As you may
realise, the condition also leads to severely slurred speech,
which, by the time I was 40 years old, meant my communication
was also seriously impaired. When I finished my PhD, there
was a demand for speaking at conferences, but I never could. I
used to have someone else read out my papers. It was hard for
me to socialise and make connections within academia because
of my slurred speech. This also resulted in people thinking that
I had a cognitive disability, and hence treating me in that way.
Therefore, I have to rely heavily on typing, but this is difficult
due to my typing speed of 1-2 words per minute. I am also
having a lot of trouble recently with my vision as it is becoming
harder for me to focus on certain objects. Generally, it takes a
while for me to focus on any particular object, and some
conditions of light and glare make it even more difficult.
I have lived on my own for 21 years, and during that time I
completed a double degree at Monash University, Australia, in
arts and accounting, then a masters degree, followed by a PhD
in sociology at the University of Melbourne. During my PhD,
I received the June Opie Fellowship from Auckland University
and a Melbourne research scholarship. Immediately after this,
I was awarded the Emerging Disability Leader of the Year award
from the Victorian Disability Professionals.
Each of the steps I have made through my higher education has
deepened my desire to promote and harness the capabilities of
people who, in diverse ways, are not diminished by disability.
I am convinced that somehow we—all of us—need to find a
way to view and support people with disabilities in proactive
and caring ways, taking equal opportunity as a principle for a
way of life that is flexible enough to assist diverse disablement
in diverse ways. Rather than focusing on combating the uncaring
and judgmental stereotypes that arise from the medical model’s
view of sympathetic charity, we need simply to face up to people
with severe disabilities as people. That is, we need a flexible
and empathetic approach, aligned to an appreciation of the
diverse social abilities, responsibilities, and opportunities that
become evident when people interact with each other as fellows,
as equals.
After completing my postgraduate degrees, I still did not want
to face the harsh stereotypical views of many in the world of
employment, and the possibility of interviews with employers
making decisions on the basis of stereotypes about people withsevere physical disabilities. Such ridiculous stereotypes confuse
the functions of those with severe physical problems with those
of severe intellectual disability. And so people like me, with
severe physical disabilities, are often believed to be intellectually
disabled as well. It works the other way too. Such discriminatory
misjudgments can be damaging, especially to people who have
severe disabilities and already suffer from low self esteem.
The need for support for my impairment has placed me under
constant pressure. That is, I want to be able to function and work
at fulfilling my desired needs and wants, but this requires
appropriate hours of attendant care to function. Unfortunately,
I am not independently wealthy, and the state provided system
does not provide, in its current form, all that is required for
adequate care.
For example, during the past 20 years of living independently
and alone with a degenerative disability, I have had the constant
need for the additional support of a personal carer. This
provision of care, however, has not been responsive to my
changing needs and life circumstances, preventing me from
achieving a rich and fulfilling life. In Australia, part of the state
disability plan focuses on supporting people with a disability
in flexible ways, based on their individual needs, so that each
person can live the lifestyle they want to lead. Regrettably, I
don’t feel the plan reaches its goal.
After my PhD, my options have improved, with my winning of
the Disability Professionals “Emerging Leader of the Year” in
March 2007. But, in reality, were the cost-benefits involved in
pursuing academic excellence all worth it? Will this give me
the necessary backing to pursue my goals of assisting in the
provision of a just and inclusive society for people with
disabilities? Are such pursuits beyond me because of my
affliction, or do my personal narratives identify the political
hurdles with greater clarity for people with severe physical
disabilities?
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P047
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Klinefelter’s syndrome—a diagnosis mislaid for 46
years
“Is my life a lie? Am I a man or a woman?” This was my reply
in May 2006 when I was asked, “How do you feel at this
moment?” I had just had my diagnosis of Klinefelter’s syndrome
confirmed. It had first been diagnosed 46 years previously, but
I had not been told. This had led to emotional turmoil and
endless questions, most of which I could not answer. I was
angry, sad, bitter, guilty, and confused in no particular order.
I do remember being taken to the Birmingham Children’s
Hospital in my early teenage years, although the details of the
visit are hazy. I do not remember a diagnosis being mentioned.
My abiding memory of the period was one of lacking energy
and severe muscle weakness, which led to an avoidance of sport.
Unlike my peers, I did not shave and was a loner. A lack of
concentration and confidence was constantly noted.
On leaving school, I trained as a chef, but an inability to cope
with the pressure of the profession resulted in my quitting. I
then became a clerical worker and, on being made redundant,
gained employment in a local brewery. I met my future wife, a
coworker in the brewery, and we married in 1968. We yearned
for a child, unaware of my associated infertility. At the age of
40 years, I was diagnosed with Crohn’s disease and underwent
bowel surgery, leaving me with an ileostomy. This resulted in
early retirement. Thus, I slipped into a quiet and mundane life
that did not require energy.
This unexciting but comfortable existence was shattered in 2005
when, after a flare up of symptoms related to Crohn’s disease,
my GP reviewed my case notes before referral. I was shown a
letter, written in 1959 by the specialist at the Birmingham
Children’s Hospital. This folded letter had been in my file,
seemingly unread. The doctor read it out to me and said that I
had been diagnosed with Klinefelter’s syndrome and my father
had been informed. I did not know what Klinefelter’s syndrome
meant and requested a copy of the letter and an appointment
with an appropriate specialist. I was seen in the endocrinology
clinic at Good Hope Hospital.
On my next visit, Klinefelter’s syndrome was confirmed. This
condition was explained to me at that point. Initially I could not
take in most of what I was told. Chromosomes, sex
chromosomes, X’s and Y’s were mentioned; my mind was
confused. Was I living a lie? I did bring this up and was told
that I was a man with an extra X chromosome. This was a relief
as I had not being living a lie. My wife was as supportive as
ever. I approached my father, and he said that he had been
informed of a diagnosis but had not understood it and put it out
of his mind.
The next question bothering me was how had this condition
affected my life? It seemed that my low energy levels, physical
weakness, and lack of facial hair were due to the reduced
testosterone. What about children? It was explained that
infertility was also related to the condition. We could have
adopted a child if I had known. That would have given my wife
and me something we longed for—a child.
I also had a bone scan, this was normal. At last, something right
in my life. I was told that I needed testosterone. I perceived that
the lack of this was what had ruined my life. Why did I have to
wait until I was over 60 years old to have testosterone? I was
asked to rub on testosterone gel, and this was followed up with
blood tests. Within days I felt better, much better, and facial
hair appeared. I did not shave; the facial hair now comforted
me.Trouble once again. I was told that my red blood cell count had
increased. I was sent to a haematologist, who, after more blood
tests, suggested taking a pint of blood every two months
depending on my blood count. I could continue to take my
testosterone, and this was now increased to two sachets of gel
daily. After some time, the red cell count stopped rising above
the level considered dangerous.
Matters did not remain calm for long. I was told that my PSA
(prostate specific antigen) level, a possible marker of prostate
cancer, was raised, perhaps due to the testosterone treatment. I
was sent to a urologist. More blood tests, and then the
testosterone dose was dropped to one sachet daily. Biopsy was
discussed, but there was a risk in view of my ileostomy.
Although my PSA level came down, I did not feel well on the
lower dose of testosterone—much weaker and with no life
within me. I have increased the dose to a sachet and a half and
will be followed-up closely.
Have I entered calmer waters? Only time will tell. After these
turbulent five years, I am certain that my life is not a lie—I am
a man.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P048
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Thoracic outlet syndrome
It all started around nine years ago when I was 17; I began to
get a strange tingling and a dull ache in my left arm. I noticed
I couldn’t carry a bag over my left shoulder, as my arm seemed
to go numb and achy. At the time I was training at college to
be a beauty therapist. I kept getting strange electric shock
sensations and stabbing pains and the feeling of a dead heavy
arm, but I remember putting it down to over-working at college
and at work. I ignored it for as long as possible. I mentioned it
in passing while seeing my general practitioner for an unrelated
matter.
I explained to my doctor the pains and symptoms I had been
getting. She then carried out some sensory tests on my arm. I
watched a needle being pressed on my arm and hand and knew
it should be hurting or at least feeling sharp, but I couldn’t feel
it at all. The general practitioner pointed out that I had muscle
wastage in my left hand; my palm was indented and my tendons
could be felt, I had no pad of muscle under my thumb area, and
the back of my hand also looked thin. I had not noticed this
before.
My doctor arranged an urgent appointment for me to see a
neurosurgeon. From then on I had so many tests I can’t even
remember the number—nerve conduction studies with needles
and electrodes, vascular scans, magnetic resonance imaging,
radiography, etc—and everyone seemed to be confused by the
results.
Eventually I was told I had a condition called thoracic outlet
syndrome and that it was rare, especially in my case as it
affected my veins, arteries, and nerves. I was then told that I
needed surgery to remove some ribs and fibrous bands to stop
the damage to my hand, as the veins were being squashed and
affecting blood flow.
I spoke to my doctor and various specialists and I did a lot of
research myself, but there was not much information on thoracic
outlet syndrome. I did, however, find a good website called
PubMed. I also found a surgeon in America whose book I
ordered. This explained everything in depth.
I could not believe it; one minute I was at college and working
at my mum’s salon enjoying my life and friends and the next I
was being told I had to have major surgery for a rare condition.
I made sure I worked hard at college and completed the course.
It took my mind off things, but I couldn’t ignore the fact that
my arm and hand seemed to be deteriorating, and at an alarming
speed. I was in constant pain and was now on strong pain
medication. My left hand had become “claw-like”—where the
muscles were wasting my fingers were being pulled in. I hated
this.
It took a long time before I had my first operation. I was told
the surgery would not improve the muscle atrophy as the damage
had been done, but that the pain would improve. After surgery
I was in agony, with the same pains and more; my left eye was
also drooping. I was reassured that after a few months things
would settle down.
Around six months later I still had the pains. In addition,
symptoms were developing on my right side. I went to see my
surgeon but she was quite dismissive. I was worried about the
same problem developing on the right side so spoke with my
doctor who referred me back to the surgeon. Tests detected
similar problems on the right side.
I had to have the same surgery on the right side. My left side
still didn’t feel right though, despite my surgeon insisting it was,
so I carried on researching for myself and with help from my
mum we emailed a specialist in the United States. He thought
I should seek a second opinion. At this point my left hand had
become a lot worse and my fingers were shrinking. I couldn’t
keep on any of my rings. I could barely attend to my own
cosmetic needs let alone do it as a career all day every day.The second specialist said I would have to have more surgery
on my left side as soon as possible. I stayed in hospital for a
week. It took months to recover and I was in excruciating pain,
but after a while things seemed a bit better. Unfortunately my
right hand had deteriorated and I underwent a second operation.
Although surgery helped the right arm, my left arm did not
improve and my specialist wanted me to see a consultant in
Oxford.
This specialist too seemed concerned and decided that I needed
further surgery as something was definitely compressing my
left side. After a fifth operation I remained in a lot of pain.
Despite this I continued to try and push forward. My life had
been changed and with that went my career in beauty therapy,
so to try and stay positive I had to look at what I could do. I
eventually enrolled in a counselling course and managed to
qualify as a counselor. During my studies I was told that I
needed my left side operated on again as the surgery had not
worked. I was devastated by the prospect of more surgery but
I did manage to finish my course first.
I have since had my sixth and seventh surgeries. The sixth was
on my left side in September 2011 and the seventh on my right
side in March 2012. I have now had four major surgeries on my
left side and three on my right side. I have had another two ribs
out, lots of scar tissue removed, tissue attached to my chest wall,
and part of my lung taken away (I also had reconstructive chest
surgery and the main nerve from the spine to arm cut and
reattached on the left side, and the nerve straightened on the
right side). I have been told that for at least two years I will need
to wear splints on both hands and arms. I am hoping that the
last two procedures will make a difference to my daily pain
levels and disability.
Both my hands are clawed. I cannot work any more and I
struggle on a daily basis with even the simplest things such as
opening a can, cleaning, and even dressing and sleeping. I cannot
socialise to the same extent as a typical 26 year old as I get tired
from the pain. I rely on my partner, family, and friends to help
me each day. The privilege of doing everyday tasks is not
realised until it’s taken away. As I am still in so much pain daily,
I am on a lot of medication. I save up money every month and
pay privately for acupuncture and sports massage.
This condition affects every part of my life. Even though I try
to stay positive and active, it is hard. I still hope that I can pursue
a career in counselling.
My surgeon and doctor as well as numerous other consultants
have told me that this is the worst and most complicated case
of thoracic outlet syndrome they have ever seen. Even though
the condition has altered my life and nearly everything in it I
will not be beaten by it. Thoracic outlet syndrome is a part of
my life; I am not a part of its life.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P049
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Psychotic depression

I had an easy early life. My family was a combination of
conservative and intellectual, and throughout medical school I
fitted in. There were, perhaps, a number of warning signs of
what was to come—a long period of blackness after a
relationship ended, and one of poorly controlled mood before
final exams—but hardly different from many others. I was
unaware at that time of family history.
I coped well with the stress of house jobs followed by a number
of senior house officer jobs and a period of travelling. I then
decided, for romantic and literary reasons, to do my GP training
year in Cornwall. It was hard work, but all went well until, after
my marriage, I found myself rather unexpectedly—though not
unhappily—pregnant. Quite suddenly my life fell apart. I don’t
remember feeling depressed, but I became terrified of
everything, afraid to eat, and convinced the baby would die. I
saw a psychiatrist, who dispensed with note taking as it might
apparently affect my career, and ended up briefly in a psychiatric
hospital before being looked after by one of my fellow GPs, my
husband, and my mother-in-law. I had no idea what was wrong
with me.
When I was around five months pregnant, we moved back to
Edinburgh and went to our GP, who immediately referred me
to a psychiatrist, who sent me straight to the local hospital. I
had last been there as a medical student, several of my friends
and colleagues worked there, and my previous life as a doctor
was instantly shattered. I had hoped to train as a psychiatrist
myself, and I thought that possibility was now extinguished,
that anyone who had been a psychiatric inpatient would never
be accepted as a colleague.
I don’t really know how I felt—bleak and exhausted, but also
sad and angry, especially when I saw other doctors apparently
confident and successful. I had a series of admissions, both
before and after my baby was born.
What was my diagnosis? How to classify the feelings of fear,
terrible fatigue, anxiety, and blackness? Depression was what
I was told, but I formed an unshakeable conviction that everyone
thought I had a personality disorder. Looking back, I still think
my personality was sorely tested by my experiences. I did
improve with electroconvulsive therapy and medication, but
hated taking them.
Finally, after a period of relative stability, I managed to return
to work, to a junior hospital post. I hadn’t worked for two and
a half years, and felt incompetent and inadequate. I subsequently
finished my GP training, but realised I would be unlikely to get
a job given my medical history. When I look back now, I wonder
how I had the courage, or the cheek, to apply for a psychiatric
training scheme. One of my psychiatrists advised me not to,
and I am generally very reluctant to do things others disapprove
of, but I think I knew I would always regret not doing it.
I had a long commute, as I, and others, felt I could not work
locally. I loved the work and think I was good at it, but I can’t
pretend it wasn’t emotionally draining. I have always felt like
two people—the psychiatrist and the psychiatric patient—and
it is very difficult when they overlap. I even use two names, as
do many female doctors, but I think my reasons are slightly
different.
My training proceeded well, and I was lucky to experience no
problems with exams. Life was not straightforward, though. I
had an early stillbirth, and, perhaps inevitably, a relapse
followed. But I picked myself up, and staggered through another
pregnancy as well as my training. Looking back, I think I was
very anxious for some years after this, but relatively well
otherwise, at least partly due to my always supportive husband.
I think I took medication for much of the time, but certainly had
some lucky periods where I didn’t.
My husband has always found the switch from spouse to carer
and back rather difficult, particularly during periods of recovery,
and especially given that I don’t really appreciate what I’m like
when ill. He also finds my occasional non-compliance with
medication understandably infuriating. But I admit I worry more
about the potential effect on my three daughters. Any illness in
a parent is both frightening and annoying for children, and mine
isn’t an easy one to understand, or indeed to explain to friends
or teachers. Worse, I’ve not always been there for them, and
one of them has experienced emotional difficulties. I can’t prove
that my illness caused this, but I’m pretty sure it contributed,
and I shall always bear the guilt.
Six years ago I gained a consultant post in addiction psychiatry
in the local hospital where I had been a patient. I had been a
trainee with my colleagues, and, for the first time, had not
divulged my history. In fact, I thought they knew and was rather
mortified when I subsequently discovered this was not the case.
But I couldn’t quite believe it—a job near my home in the
specialty of my choice. Initially, I found that walking past wards
where I had been a patient was troubling, but I gradually stopped
thinking of myself as a patient.
Unfortunately I have since had episodes of illness, one
necessitating an admission out of area and another resulting in
a series of electroconvulsive therapy as a day patient in the
hospital where I work. I still find the experience of illness
troubling and confusing—in many ways it makes me feel like
a different person. When I read a textbook description of
psychotic depression, my diagnosis, I can’t marry it with how
I feel. I do feel low, but also agitated and frightened, and simply
very ill. I still fear that others think I have a personality disorder.
And this, for me, is one of the harder aspects. I work in a
hospital where I’ve had some significant admissions and
treatment. I find it hard when I speak with doctors who have
treated me. But what is far worse is the uncertainty as to whether
others—doctors and nurses—have seen me as a patient, or have
listened to the inevitable hospital gossip, and formed opinions.
My memories of my periods of illness are very muddled, and I
simply don’t know who knows or who has treated me. My close
colleagues are hugely supportive, but I’ve heard talk about
psychiatric patients, including about healthcare professionals,
and it’s not all kind. It’s difficult to sit in a ward round talking
with a nurse I suspect may have seen me in much unhappier
circumstances, and I can’t help wondering whether people think
I shouldn’t work here. My current plan is to be more open and
to tell people, but that’s not easy either. Often they’re very
embarrassed, and I don’t want my patient status to become the
most important thing that people know about me.
Some day I hope my two selves will become less separate, and
my working life will become more comfortable. Until then I
will try to comply with my psychiatrist’s advice, try to remain
well, and to make sure the psychiatrist remembers what the
patient experiences.
---NARRATIVE_END---

---NARRATIVE_START---
id: P050
author_type: patient
source: BMJ
title: Antiphospholipid syndrome

Imagine a box of jigsaw pieces tipped out on the floor, all the
bits are there, but to have a clear picture, I first had to put them
all together to make sense. This was a journey that I was to take.
I had a normal childhood. One delay that stands out was that I
did not begin menstruating until the age of 18, and my periods
were irregular. Around this time I experienced stabbing stomach
pains that left me short of breath. My two pregnancies in 1990
and 1997 were complicated because I experienced severe
unexplained abdominal pain, vomiting, and fatigue during and
after the birth, and I put my forgetfulness (not remembering
friends’ names) down to becoming a mum.
After the birth of my second child I started vomiting every day.
After two weeks I was admitted to hospital and after another
few weeks of investigations I was taken to theatre as an
emergency. A computed tomography scan showed a “swelling”
in my abdomen. I was diagnosed with an unexplained blood
clot in my large bowel that had burst. The incident was explained
to me as “a mystery” as I had had a normal second birth.
After discharge following my bowel operation I was promptly
readmitted with a suspected pulmonary embolism. I was treated
with heparin injections, and a computed tomography scan was
inconclusive. In 2001, I returned from a holiday abroad with a
throbbing pain in my left leg. I had several blood tests, but was
not contacted about the results by the hospital staff. The
pounding pain subsided and I forgot all about the discomfort.
When I finally got a diagnosis of antiphospholipid syndrome I
requested access to my GP records to look for clues or things
that had been missed; looking back through my notes I saw that
a lupus anticoagulant blood test was positive.
In the following years I underwent several operations—for
example, removal of my gall bladder and a thrombus in the
portal vein. Both were accompanied by continuous extreme
fatigue and “brain fog.” I overheard a consultant commenting
after one of the operations that my blood had been “acting
weirdly,” but I did not take any notice or ask why.
In 2008 it seemed to me that a guardian angel pointed me in the
right direction. My left leg was constantly hurting, so my general
practitioner referred me to a vascular consultant. He arranged
a battery of blood tests and a Doppler examination of my left
leg, which identified a clotting abnormality and showed that I
had developed a blood clot in my popliteal artery and long
saphenous vein. In addition, my kidney function was severely
compromised so he urgently transferred me to a haematologist.
Apart from the ongoing fatigue and pain I now had a continuous
headache. The haematologist took a detailed history, advised
me not to travel by plane, but instead ordered specific blood
tests, a magnetic resonance imaging scan, and an angiogram. I
think now that this consultant saved my life. I felt physically
and emotionally exhausted. To my surprise the scan and
angiogram showed that my right kidney and coeliac and superior
mesenteric arteries were occluded. A subsequent brain scan
showed high signal lesions. A week later I was referred to the
lupus clinic where I was diagnosed with a rare autoimmune
condition called primary vascular antiphospholipid syndrome,
which causes an increased risk of blood clots (and miscarriages).
My medical history now suddenly all made sense to me and I
finally had a name to explain my strange, unexplained symptoms
over so many years.The first few months after diagnosis were hectic. I had to get
my drug regimen stabilised. The treatment was lifelong
anticoagulation that required close regular blood monitoring. I
was also diagnosed as having stage 3 kidney failure and
therefore my hypertension required frequent check-ups (I had
lost one kidney already). I was prescribed hydroxychloroquine
for muscle aches in my arms and legs, and fatigue.
I continue to work full time in “planning and performance” for
a government department. My employers have been sympathetic
and understanding about my illness and have made reasonable
adjustments for me. I describe my body like an old car—I cannot
sit in it and drive off. Instead, when I wake up in the morning
I have to gently start myself up before I am able to function
physically and mentally—sometimes I cannot function at all.
Every day I experience antiphospholipid syndrome in a different
way.Unfortunately, it took 17 years to receive a diagnosis, which
meant a lot of damage was already done to my body. I was
introduced to the manager of the Hughes Syndrome Foundation,
who provided me with leaflets and important information about
antiphospholipid syndrome. Going forward is the only way for
me and I have to make the best of my situation. I have therefore
decided to raise awareness and educate people about
antiphospholipid syndrome, including family, friends, and
colleagues, and sometimes even doctors. Many healthcare
professionals that I meet have not come across patients with
antiphospholipid syndrome and therefore lack information about
this rare autoimmune condition. I have learnt not to ignore
symptoms. I have decided that it is better to consult a doctor to
avoid further negative consequences to my health or miss out
on vital treatment.
I manage my pain through painkillers and heat therapy—hot
water bottles, hot baths, and saunas. Some of the pain, I have
discovered, seems to be triggered by specific foods—for
example, wheat, red meat, and certain fruits and vegetables. I
therefore follow a diet that facilitates easy digestion such as
fish, chicken, rice, and bananas. I still have stomach pains on a
daily basis. I use a walking stick most of the time because of
leg pain and joint stiffness. This visual aid lets people know
that I am unwell as antiphospholipid syndrome is mostly
invisible to others. I had to learn to pace myself—if I do not
rest during the day, I experience unnecessary pain and fatigue
and I am mentally unfocused. I have come to accept that I have
a lifelong condition and that it is not going away, and to be
honest it has contributed to who I am now.
Since my diagnosis I no longer ignore any symptoms that I
experience and make sure that I bring them to the attention of
my GP or consultant. I also ask more questions as I believe my
own understanding of my condition plays a vital part in my
wellbeing and helps me to stay in control. I prefer to be treated
as a whole person, instead of attention being paid to my
coagulation time (international normalised ratio) only. I also
like to ask medical and nursing staff questions so that I can
untangle in my mind whether new symptoms are pieces of the
complex antiphospholipid syndrome jigsaw puzzle or something
else.
---NARRATIVE_END---